[Amit Varma]: Do you care about public policy? Your answer to that is probably going to be, no man, policy
[Amit Varma]: is boring. Who wants to be a wonk? What difference does it even make? Fair enough. So let me
[Amit Varma]: ask you another question. Are you a concerned citizen who cares about society and your own
[Amit Varma]: well-being? If your answer is yes, then you should care about public policy. Public policy
[Amit Varma]: is the things that a government does that impacts your life in a million unseen ways.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, my contention is that we would have been a richer country, a better country with
[Amit Varma]: a more humane society, if only we had gotten our public policy right from day one. But
[Amit Varma]: we didn't. Now, when we look around us and see all that is wrong, what options do we
[Amit Varma]: have? The majority will make the rational choice of just being silent, getting on with
[Amit Varma]: their lives, not sweating what they cannot control. Some of us will make a noise, will
[Amit Varma]: rant, will raise our voice against injustice. But that often amounts to contributing a millionth
[Amit Varma]: of a decibel in a discourse full of noise. And some of the some of us, a small minority,
[Amit Varma]: will say, I want to actually find a way of making a difference. And often that way will
[Amit Varma]: lie through studying and understanding and influencing public policy.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. My guest today is Pranay Kotasane, one of the finest
[Amit Varma]: thinkers on public policy in this country. Pranay works at the Takshashila Institution
[Amit Varma]: in Bengaluru, for whom I used to edit the policy magazine Pragati, and he has often
[Amit Varma]: been a guest on this show. Most of the times that he has come, we spoke about foreign policy.
[Amit Varma]: Now there are a number of things I admire about Pranay. One is intellectual humility
[Amit Varma]: and his willingness to always learn. Two, the fact that he's built deep nuanced frameworks
[Amit Varma]: to look at the world, mostly by reading a lot and talking to smart people. Three, he's
[Amit Varma]: constantly trying to engage with the world and get his ideas to a wider audience. He
[Amit Varma]: does this with his Hindi podcast Puliyabazi, co-hosted with Saurabh Chandra. He also writes
[Amit Varma]: a fantastic newsletter called Anticipating the Unintended at publicpolicy.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: He co-writes this with RSJ or Raghu Sanjay Lal Jaitley, who was also on The Seen and
[Amit Varma]: the Unseen in a memorable episode a few weeks ago. Now, while Pranay has been on the show
[Amit Varma]: before, most of his appearances came in a time when the format was different, and I
[Amit Varma]: didn't spend too much time talking about my guest's personal journey. So today's
[Amit Varma]: episode is a great opportunity for me and for you to get to know and understand Pranay
[Amit Varma]: a little better. So this is going to be a wide ranging conversation on Pranay's intellectual
[Amit Varma]: journey, the private beach in his college, his failed career as a cricketing superstar,
[Amit Varma]: his theory of societism, and finally, his love for public policy and why it matters.
[Amit Varma]: This is also a good time for me to recommend that if you're interested in learning about
[Amit Varma]: public policy, you should head on over to takshashila.org.in, where admissions are now
[Amit Varma]: open for the 12-week Graduate Certificate Program in Public Policy, Defense and Foreign
[Amit Varma]: Affairs, Technology and Policy, and Health and Life Sciences. They have a cohort starting
[Amit Varma]: this September, and 28 August is the last date to apply. Pranay himself is an alumni
[Amit Varma]: of this course, and is now one of the outstanding faculty. I can't recommend this more highly.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe after this conversation, you might feel tempted to check it out as well. Maybe
[Amit Varma]: it is your duty as a citizen to do so. Let's take a quick commercial break now. And then
[Amit Varma]: we start talking.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is, how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people uplevel themselves
[Amit Varma]: by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read. The subjects
[Amit Varma]: covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade. This helped
[Amit Varma]: me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world a little
[Amit Varma]: better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to
[Amit Varma]: CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader. New batches start every month. They also have
[Amit Varma]: a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up to date with ideas, skills
[Amit Varma]: and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future Stack batches
[Amit Varma]: start every Saturday. Also check out their Social Capital Compound, which helps you master
[Amit Varma]: social media. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2500 rupees 2500 if you use
[Amit Varma]: the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use
[Amit Varma]: the code UNSEEN. Uplevel yourself.
[Amit Varma]: I
[Guest]: record Puliyabazi as you know, and you've been a guest on Puliyabazi and I have done
[Guest]: Audacity sound recordings many times and I have done editing. So I am very qualified
[Guest]: to be there wherever Rahul Dravid is. Please take me in.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, done. So I'll get you in. But you know, if something goes wrong, I can well imagine
[Amit Varma]: Rahul telling me that boss, you got Rahul Dravid as a guest, you should have got the
[Amit Varma]: Rahul Dravid of sound engineers. But instead, you got the okay, I don't want to take anyone's
[Amit Varma]: name. I'm just kidding. So before we kind of go back into your distant past, let's talk
[Amit Varma]: about the immediate past, like the last few months. I mean, the last time we spoke and
[Amit Varma]: recorded was remotely right after COVID started, because in February, we'd done an episode
[Amit Varma]: on foreign policy, but it hadn't released. So when COVID started, I said, let's do a
[Amit Varma]: half an hour recording to sort of give an update on that. And we did that you and Manoj
[Amit Varma]: were the guests and that was a great episode. But how's life been with you? From that point,
[Amit Varma]: you go to office, how do you get your work done? Is it hard to work from home, and so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth? I do see that there's a poster on the wall behind you, which says, where
[Amit Varma]: the mind is without fear. So and knowing you, I'm sure that's been your sort of attitude
[Amit Varma]: throughout. So tell me.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's been quite a different experience, I would say, because we had two lifestyle
[Guest]: changes, not once. So basically, both my wife and I became parents just before the pandemic.
[Guest]: So that was one life change. And after that COVID hit, so I have been unable to disaggregate
[Guest]: the two effects, that what has caused what, but I can surely say life has changed a lot,
[Guest]: right. And it's just been very different, I'd say, learning parenting as well. It's
[Guest]: been a very different experience. Just to think of, there's a mental bandwidth, which
[Guest]: the kid always occupies, right? Earlier, when you're working, you can just switch everything
[Guest]: off, or at least pretend to switch everything off and concentrate on work and do tweeting
[Guest]: instead. But now it's completely different, right? You need to always have one channel
[Guest]: in that bandwidth, which is occupied by what's happening with the kid, etc. So that's been
[Guest]: a big change. I would say, it's like a kid is both an amplifier and a frequency changer,
[Guest]: which means that the highs are very high, and the lows are very low. And they come very
[Guest]: soon, one after the other, unlike earlier, you know, that life was more DC current, or
[Guest]: AC with a small frequency, but now it is amplified. And so that's one big change. And of course,
[Guest]: COVID has hit. So in a way, we've been working at home itself, as you know, Amit, all our
[Guest]: courses are online. So that's not been a big, big change as such, we could work right out
[Guest]: of the box, like we were earlier. But other than that, yeah, just been worried over the
[Guest]: last few months. But now with people getting vaccinated, with parents having been vaccinated,
[Guest]: and also the sort of mental stress is a bit less. But other than that, I just say to people
[Guest]: up to other CM which goes as a genetic.
[Amit Varma]: So congratulations, son or daughter, son, and he's going to be really pissed off and
[Amit Varma]: at whatever point in time you allow him to listen to adult content like this, when he
[Amit Varma]: listens to this and he hears phrases like disaggregate and AC current and he's like,
[Amit Varma]: is that how you talk about a baby? You should. Yes, I presume you've become an expert diaper
[Amit Varma]: changer as well.
[Guest]: Yeah, I'm good at it now.
[Amit Varma]: And do you approach that the same way you approach public policy in the sense work out
[Amit Varma]: first principles and have easy heuristics that first this versus where was it like if
[Amit Varma]: there's somebody who embodies the word weverse it in my mind, it's definitely you because
[Amit Varma]: you're so systematic about your thinking. I mean, I have not absorbed you living your
[Amit Varma]: life as it were, but in your thinking, so is that how you approach parenting in general
[Guest]: as well?
[Guest]: Not so much. I mean, actually, and that's what I'm learning and trying to improve myself.
[Guest]: Yeah, earlier it was like, you know, work is something different. And you put in a lot
[Guest]: of effort, but you didn't put that in your personal life. Right. But now I'm learning.
[Guest]: So I we did read a lot of books before the kid came along, but still still building that
[Guest]: first principles base, you know, so have subscribed to a bunch of newsletters, reading them, trying
[Guest]: to figure out but it's it's still the heuristics are so very weak, you know, so it's still
[Guest]: improving on that. But yeah, I have gathered a few things like I told you about this mental
[Guest]: overload idea that has sort of hit home. And yeah, that's so it's just the beginning, I
[Guest]: would say, but not been so we have a state as I would have liked to be.
[Amit Varma]: Right, let's now move back to the distant past, maybe 10 years later, if you're on an
[Amit Varma]: episode, I'll ask you about parenting and you'll have a whole system of thought worked
[Amit Varma]: out. But But for now, take me back to your childhood because much as we have had much
[Amit Varma]: many spend many delightful hours discussing public policy and economics and foreign policy,
[Amit Varma]: and your sound engineering skills, I don't really know anything else about you. So take
[Amit Varma]: me back to your past. Take me back to your childhood.
[Guest]: Okay, so my surname, as you would have seen this quite a bit weird, no, you wouldn't have
[Amit Varma]: heard it usually. So
[Amit Varma]: in fact, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute. Because on Twitter, I had just put
[Amit Varma]: up a tweet before the recording saying does anyone have any questions for you? And one
[Amit Varma]: of those questions is, what does the word Kotasthane mean?
[Guest]: Yeah, so even I don't know.
[Guest]: Anti-climax.
[Guest]: Yeah, so Kotasthane, actually, it might must be something related to court, the fort. So
[Guest]: maybe whatever protector of the fortress or something, some military title that but beyond
[Guest]: that, even I don't just pure guesswork. But yeah, so I come from a Marathi family, but
[Guest]: from Madhya Pradesh, Indore. So first seven years of my life were in Indore. And after
[Guest]: that, we moved to Goa. So all my life has been in Goa. And that has shaped me a lot.
[Guest]: Given that in Indore, we were a lot with people like us, right. And the mix, the intercultural
[Guest]: mix was slightly narrower. But once you went to Goa, you had people from all over India,
[Guest]: I was in a Navy school. So just met so many people from all over India. So that was like,
[Guest]: it shaped me a lot in terms of how I think in terms of just this idea of being with people
[Guest]: who are not like you in many respects. So that was a really important thing for me about
[Guest]: childhood. Actually, one thing which I think differentiates me from many of the guests
[Guest]: on seen and unseen is that I didn't read a lot. Okay, so I'm not proud of it, but I didn't
[Guest]: read a lot. So I used to devour textbooks. I was one of those people who used to read
[Guest]: before the teacher will teach and all the other people used to hate me. So reading is
[Guest]: sort of always correlated with learning for me. This idea of reading for entertainment
[Guest]: was not familiar to me, you know. So I read very little, I played a lot. And because I
[Guest]: was in Goa, we had an excellent football ground. The Indian football team used to come and
[Guest]: practice there. So I had the privilege of seeing Bhaichung Bhutia, I am Vijayan and
[Guest]: all that there, you know, so that was like super fun. And unfortunately, we used to play
[Guest]: cricket on the football ground. So that is also there. And he used to really enjoy doing
[Guest]: that. So I used to love cricket a lot. And we had a big veranda, big garden actually
[Guest]: in our in the place that I lived in. So we used to, there was this coaxial cable that
[Guest]: we drew from the edge of our sort of the sloping roof, and it is tied to another Ashoka tree
[Guest]: and suspended is a leather ball in a sock. And that is what I used to do the entire day.
[Guest]: So that sound constantly coming out. So everyone in the colony knew that Pranay is here because
[Guest]: that sound used to just keep irritating them. So that's what it was. So my father didn't
[Guest]: wasn't in the Navy, he was working in a fertilizer factory. So like many of your guests earlier,
[Guest]: who have either been born in that colony type of atmosphere or in a government quarter,
[Guest]: I was in the earlier category. So in a private company, my father was working and we used
[Guest]: to live in this colony very isolated. The beach was just two kilometers away. So yeah,
[Guest]: it was great fun.
[Amit Varma]: Well, quite the life and Bradman apparently also used to do that where he'd hang a single
[Amit Varma]: ball and he'd play it against I forget the exact dynamics, whether he had a bat or he
[Amit Varma]: just used a stump. And that was the making of Bradman. So cricket's loss is public policy
[Amit Varma]: is gained clearly. And yeah, I mean, who today remembers, you know, names like Vijay and
[Amit Varma]: Bhutia and all of that legendary names, even though I never actually saw them play in the
[Amit Varma]: flesh and he never went to a ground and so any of them play but one knows those names.
[Amit Varma]: So it's very interesting that you speak about reading for learning because one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that I have in fact remarked upon something that you do and something that you do way
[Amit Varma]: better than me and I need to actually sit down with you and pick your brain on that
[Amit Varma]: is read a book so thoroughly while taking notes like it's something incredible the way
[Amit Varma]: you get into a book. And I take pretty exhaustive notes myself. But you're at a different level.
[Amit Varma]: I've actually seen you making mind maps of you know, things from books and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll take a digression and go back to your past later, go back to your past later.
[Amit Varma]: And tell me a little bit about this. I think one of the things that we realize as we go
[Amit Varma]: through life and especially I realized now in my middle age is that our brain doesn't
[Amit Varma]: absorb information so well. So you have to find systematic ways of trying to absorb information
[Amit Varma]: as well as you can manage. And obviously, technology is a great tool there. There's
[Amit Varma]: an entrepreneur called Tiago Forte, who does a course called building a second brain which
[Amit Varma]: costs a few thousand dollars or something. Tell me a little bit about this then that
[Guest]: what are your knowledge management methods?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I have been experimenting with these knowledge management methods a lot, had tried
[Guest]: all these tools which are there, you know, the Evernotes and then you had Notion and
[Guest]: now currently it's Obsidian. So trying a bunch of things. So there's not a fixed method there.
[Guest]: But one thing I try to whenever I have a book, I generally have a goal in mind, like, what
[Guest]: do I want to get out of it? Sometimes I'll just read the first and last chapter and then
[Guest]: go deep dive into it. But I don't take a lot of notes, I will underline like I read mostly
[Guest]: on a Kindle. So I will always do a lot of highlighting, and then export those highlights
[Guest]: and I'll go over the highlights after I have read the book, and then try to come up with
[Guest]: my own summary. So that is the process which actually it takes because finally, in a from
[Guest]: a book, you can hardly take away, you know, four or five sentences that you will actually
[Guest]: remember after a year or so. So I want to get to that main idea in rather than the entire
[Guest]: story, you know, because I find a lot of books are just historical retellings of some things,
[Guest]: which you would have come across in other books as well. So finally, you want to get
[Guest]: to the crux. So I'm looking for that key idea, which the aha moment which made me think Oh,
[Guest]: this book, I had never thought of it that way, right. So I'm always trying to pick those
[Guest]: kinds of insights and visual map making or something really helps. So even now, the books
[Guest]: that sort of have impacted me a lot, I've always created some mind map or some visual
[Guest]: aid. Because once I put that in the mind map, you know, that just I'm able to retain that
[Guest]: for longer for some reason, the other you know, and then even after a year or so, I
[Guest]: at least know where in the mind map will be that idea which I was looking for. Whereas
[Guest]: if I do that in notes where I type that that somehow doesn't happen. So maybe visually
[Guest]: that connect works better.
[Guest]: And what do you use to make these mind maps?
[Guest]: So I use a bunch of online software available. Currently, I'm using Koggle. C O G G L E.
[Guest]: It's freely available. So just I use that one.
[Amit Varma]: Cool. And if you have an example of such a mind map, can I link it for my listeners?
[Guest]: Or I mean, I can even post an image of such a mind map.
[Guest]: Sure. Yeah, I made one for the lessons of history by Will Durant. So that's that's there.
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful, wonderful. So that will be linked from the show notes in some way or form. So
[Amit Varma]: getting back to your childhood, you've grown up in Goa. And at this moment, as we are piecing
[Amit Varma]: together bits of your life and trying to forensically figure out what happens next, it seems likely
[Amit Varma]: that you are going to end up in some form as Rahul Ravid's teammate, perhaps when he's
[Amit Varma]: about to retire, and you're coming in and he hands over the baton or the bat as it were.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not what happens next. So tell me a little bit about sort of how your journey
[Amit Varma]: proceeds from there.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I mean, yeah, I used to love cricket, but I was never good at it. So I used to be
[Guest]: one of those kids. I mean, you see on the streets, we'll do this bowling action and
[Guest]: then batting action and then fielding also oblivious to all the people around them. So
[Guest]: I was that kind of a person, but never really good at it. So 99% hard work, 1% talent, that
[Guest]: kind of person. So yeah, so I did play some cricket, but was more interested in studies
[Guest]: and all that. So reading wise, yeah, a lot of it was generally reading. In the earlier
[Guest]: lives, it was Tinkles and a lot of Sportstar. I used to like Sportstar magazine. And I remember
[Guest]: this child craft encyclopedia from the past somehow that those were the books that I used
[Guest]: to like, enjoy reading, you know, something new I hadn't known. Back then, again, no internet,
[Guest]: right. So and we didn't have a great library, like our school had a really small library
[Guest]: and distances in Goa were huge. So no concept of a library around my house, at least for
[Guest]: seven, eight kilometers. So there was one small library of our sort of the entire factory
[Guest]: residing people. So I used to just pick up some books there. But I remember one thing
[Guest]: earlier as to read this, when I was to go to Indore for the summer holidays, we used
[Guest]: to always read these Raj comics books. Those are all not great reading, I wouldn't recommend
[Guest]: to anyone, but I spent a lot of time reading those. So there was this weird mix of a grocery
[Guest]: store and a library in many North Indian cities, right. So you will have people buying sugar
[Guest]: and also books laying down and you can pick them up for 50 paisa for a day and give them
[Guest]: back and things like that. So these were comic books, right in Hindi. So I used to read a
[Guest]: lot of like that really junk reading, but that was like in the summer holidays. In our
[Guest]: home we used to get Hindi newspaper daily. So read a lot of Hindi newspaper in the evenings.
[Guest]: Hindi newspaper is to reach in at 4pm in the evening. So used to read that. So that was
[Guest]: pretty much my like reading diet. And a lot of it was studying etc. Did 10th in Goa, did
[Guest]: reasonably well I was I think, I think I was the first in the state or something like that.
[Guest]: And then then went to 11th, 12th. I was always, I was fascinated by engineering, wanted to
[Guest]: learn what that is. So took up the whatever science stream, 12th and etc. Then got into
[Guest]: Yeah, by the way, I should also talk a lot about the failures. So like all people who
[Guest]: wanted to do engineering, I started my IIT preparations at home itself, there were no
[Guest]: concept of tuitions, I've never been to a tuition. So used to just read what a brilliant
[Guest]: tutorials many people will relate to it. So bought those books was never it wasn't good
[Guest]: enough for that. So didn't get through that. But I got to a really nice college, which
[Guest]: is NIT Suratkal. It's in Karnataka. And luckily it has a beach of its own. So that was like
[Guest]: some connect. And yeah, so spent four years there doing electronics engineering, again,
[Guest]: something that really fascinated me. So I was really enjoying learning that. So that
[Guest]: was about my engineering days. Yeah, one thing why semiconductors and things that sort of
[Guest]: fascinated me was just because I even then I believe that, you know, the entire world
[Guest]: that we see the change that we see is because of these chips, right? Like the way they have
[Guest]: given us a new life, a lot of what we do are because of the advancements in semiconductors
[Guest]: and chip making, right? So just like people say how every inkjet printer today will have
[Guest]: more computing power than you know, NASA had its disposal for taking people to the moon.
[Guest]: That's so fascinating, right? Like, which other technology has advanced by that way.
[Guest]: So there are lots of like Moore's law and all it's just a heuristic. All those things
[Guest]: sort of were fascinating. So did that work for a while? And yeah, that was my engineering
[Guest]: days and then sort of wanted to continue in that field for some time. But one thing I
[Guest]: knew I didn't want to go out of India like somehow I had I still have this feeling that
[Guest]: I want to do something here in this country for some weird reason. But anyway, so I again
[Guest]: took this GATE exam, which is there for people who want to do masters in Indian colleges
[Guest]: and all. Again, I failed at that so couldn't get through that. But I got a really good
[Guest]: job which was in one of the best semiconductor companies in the world. So I sort of took
[Guest]: that job up in Bangalore, worked for six, seven years, enjoyed that. But then I thought
[Guest]: six, seven years is a lot to be doing the same thing. In between in 2008, 9, I also
[Guest]: thought, okay, let me try UPSC. Why not? You know, governance, government interested me.
[Guest]: So I thought, while I'm working, let me try it. So I tried that also, and I failed there
[Guest]: also. So basically, competitive exams are not my forte. And that happened. But I continued
[Guest]: working there. In between continued playing cricket. So captain, my captain, my school
[Guest]: team, then college team, I didn't captain but company team I captained again. So that
[Guest]: was sort of one thing that I enjoyed. And after that, so the reason I mentioned cricket
[Guest]: is because there is a connect to public policy there. So while I was playing cricket, one
[Guest]: of the interns who was there in our team, he told me something that there is something
[Guest]: called public policy. And there is something called a course at Takshashila that people
[Guest]: do. And by that time, I had not heard about this word at all, right? This is 2012 or 2013.
[Guest]: I have not heard about public policy. I've read blogs, I and all of Nitin and others,
[Guest]: your blog, etc. I'd read that but nothing beyond that. I said, Okay, maybe I didn't
[Guest]: get into the government. But there is something now to learn about the government without
[Guest]: being in the government. So isn't that fascinating? So let me try that. So I took up the course
[Guest]: which is GCPP graduate certificate in public policy course while I was working in a semiconductor
[Guest]: company and I quite enjoyed what I learned sort of opened a completely new way of thinking
[Guest]: for me. It gave me a framework to see the world and see the news in a new way. So was
[Guest]: quite inspired by that. And then I thought, Okay, I have done seven years in a particular
[Guest]: field. Seven years is too long to be doing the same thing. Why not try something else?
[Guest]: And that's when Yeah, a lot of people in our company was like, what the hell? You can't
[Guest]: even explain what you're going to do. And you're going to do that, leaving a good job.
[Guest]: You know, they said, you know, see, this is the salary you might earn. And this is the
[Guest]: opportunity cost of losing it. They didn't use that word. But yeah, opportunity cost
[Guest]: of losing it. Do you really want to do it? So I said, like, I will try it, you know,
[Guest]: let me try something for a year, which is, which I want to just because I'm really interested
[Guest]: in it. If it doesn't work out, probably, I will come back, you know, so that was my
[Guest]: attitude. And yeah, that was 2013. So now seven years, I've been doing various things
[Guest]: related to public policy. And it's been really great fun, you know, so that's how it's been.
[Guest]: So a lot of failures, some luck, some privilege, and that's how where I am.
[Amit Varma]: This is really scary. Now that you mentioned that you've done seven years, and I'm wondering
[Amit Varma]: abhi yeh kya karega, scary and also exciting, because who knows, maybe, you know, like your
[Amit Varma]: colleague Manoj failed to do, you might get into Bollywood and become a star or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: one never knows. The fact that you couldn't get into government. So you decided to learn
[Amit Varma]: about government from the outside. It reminds me of this great quote by Lyndon Johnson,
[Amit Varma]: when Lyndon Johnson had made J. Edgar Hoover, the FBI director, and he was asked that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: come on, the guy's a scumbag, you know, he's a scumbag. Why have you hired him? And Johnson
[Amit Varma]: said, quote, it's probably better to have him inside the tent pissing out than outside
[Amit Varma]: the tent pissing in, stop quote. So had the IAS people knew that you were going to be
[Amit Varma]: outside the tent pissing in, they might well have made you an IAS officer. Let's move on
[Amit Varma]: to our next question from the Twitter feed. And I really should not be reading Twitter
[Amit Varma]: during a recording. This is absolutely a first, but it's justified. And this is from a Sambit
[Amit Varma]: Das, who asked, how were his Surat Kal days?
[Guest]: Surat Kal was great fun. Again, the entire idea is a college or a place like that is
[Guest]: made by the connections that you make, right by the people who are around you rather than
[Guest]: the teaching or the learning that you get from teachers per se, right. And that again
[Guest]: was really fascinating at Surat Kal, just because you met people from all over India.
[Guest]: So that was an NIT. I mean, it was the first year when it became an NIT. What it essentially
[Guest]: meant was that you had people from all over India. So unlike IITs, in NITs there are state
[Guest]: quotas. So every NIT will have, you know, one seat, probably one seat, at least from
[Guest]: most states in India, you know, so you had a kind of variety that you will not have even
[Guest]: in an IIT, right. So probably every state of India had a representation. So that was
[Guest]: really fun, you know, so just meeting people from so many different places was really mind
[Guest]: opening, you know, so I learned so much from that experience itself.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so I'm not going to distract myself with any more Twitter, we'll go to the questions
[Amit Varma]: that towards the end of this episode, I'm just going to focus on the things that I'm
[Amit Varma]: curious about. And the next thing I'm curious about is your engineering training in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that you know, there is a term that I often use pejoratively, the engineering
[Amit Varma]: mindset. And the engineering mindset is that kind of mindset where because you're so used
[Amit Varma]: to doing intricate designs of things, whether it's machines or whatever, you imagine that
[Amit Varma]: that same mindset can be transplanted onto public policy or economics or running a country
[Amit Varma]: or governance or whatever. And obviously, we know that that's not the way the world
[Amit Varma]: works that you cannot control or design anything that is too large from the top down, whether
[Amit Varma]: it is society or language or markets or whatever. And it requires, you know, a great deal of
[Amit Varma]: humility for someone to accept that when they have been trained their entire career, that
[Amit Varma]: they have the skills and they have the intellect to design something in a perfect way, that
[Amit Varma]: if they cannot do that, it's only a question of figuring out why and learning how to do
[Amit Varma]: it, but it can be done. Now, one of the qualities I really like about you is this constant intellectual
[Amit Varma]: humility and curiosity, where one, you know, the limits of your knowledge, you also understand
[Amit Varma]: spontaneous order really well. And, you know, I also want to spend a bit of time later in
[Amit Varma]: this episode discussing state market society, all of that with you, where we'll discuss
[Amit Varma]: these questions in detail. But first, this question about sort of the engineering mindset
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that was this something that you were plagued with? I mean, were there
[Amit Varma]: aspects of the training which you felt shaped you in positive ways? And were there aspects
[Amit Varma]: which you had to thrust aside or fight?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, that's a really good question. But I think engineering actually held me in
[Guest]: good stead while coming into public policy. The reason being, I think engineering is essentially
[Guest]: about concerned with getting things done, right? Finally, it's about a problem solving
[Guest]: mindset, you know, so you have to solve a problem. I think that is really the core of
[Guest]: public policy as well. There is a goal, you need some policy to be made towards achieving
[Guest]: that goal. And it will have its imperfections, it will have its trade offs, but you need
[Guest]: to get that thing done, you know. So that's where I think academia and very good training
[Guest]: in say, a non-engineering discipline will get you into, you know, understanding that
[Guest]: problem really well. But when you have to confront the trade offs, when you have to
[Guest]: make that cost benefit trade off, right? For that, I think an engineering training helps.
[Guest]: So that really helped me, right? Because when we are, say, talking or proposing solutions
[Guest]: to the government, or just we want to solve a particular issue, or the way we see it,
[Guest]: we have to confront those trade offs. We can't say things are complex, the world is complex.
[Guest]: Even this can happen, that can happen, and you can't leave it there. Finally, you have
[Guest]: to bite the bullet, you have to take that stance. So I think engineering helps in that,
[Guest]: you know, and like, you become comfortable with imperfections, you become comfortable
[Guest]: with imperfect solutions, and yet, you want to make the world slightly better off from
[Guest]: where you started with, right? So that sort of helped me from the engineering mindset.
[Guest]: And we often teach this in our courses as well that public policy, like engineering
[Guest]: is an applied discipline, you know, so think of biology as the science and medicine as
[Guest]: a applied discipline, or physics as a science and engineering as a discipline. Similarly,
[Guest]: you know, economic reasoning is the science and public policy is the applied discipline.
[Guest]: So in that way, public policy is quite similar to engineering, it's about getting things
[Guest]: done about solving issues, being comfortable with imperfections, you will always realize
[Guest]: that you have insufficient data, insufficient time, and yet, you want to propose a way that
[Guest]: might make things better off than they are now, right? So that engineering training helps.
[Guest]: Yeah, where it doesn't help, like you said, right, you might have this tendency that you
[Guest]: know, technocratic mindset that just do these few things, and you can control all variables,
[Guest]: and the system will respond as you want to, right? But you know, even there, engineering
[Guest]: has a lot to teach. It's not as if even in engineering, you have leakage currents, you
[Guest]: want to do some things, but you will end up the circuit won't work the way you'd want
[Guest]: it to because of some weird thing you hadn't thought about. So you try to relate those
[Guest]: things as well and try to understand that, you know, perfect solutions don't exist. You
[Guest]: try to make things work. So that helped. But I totally agree that that mindset is there
[Guest]: and I try to keep away from it that one, I don't know enough. So that is always something
[Guest]: to begin with. And the idea that you need to know so many more disciplines to even understand
[Guest]: a tiny bit of society, right? infinitely complex system than a circuit, right? Human society,
[Guest]: there are so many variables for any issue. Everything is multi causal. So you can't attribute
[Guest]: to a particular issue very easily. So that though all those problems exist, and I think
[Guest]: that humility comes for anyone who's just looking at the world as it is, you know, once
[Guest]: you look at the world as it is, you will just be dumbfounded by its complexity. So you will
[Guest]: try to maybe model it some way you will maybe have a system loop to try and explain, okay,
[Guest]: maybe this causes this and that causes so, but then once you try putting that system
[Guest]: map, so very soon it gets so complex, that you realize that, you know, it's not a system
[Guest]: which can be managed like a circuit can be you know, and that that black box which society
[Guest]: is itself is so complex that modeling its output is not not very easy. So I guess, yeah,
[Guest]: though, there are benefits, and you also realize your limitations pretty soon, once you start
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: I love the analogies, you draw theory and practice in the sense that, you know, physics
[Amit Varma]: is a theory and engineering is a practical application, economic reasoning is a theory
[Amit Varma]: and public policy is a practical application. But there is a sort of a difference in these
[Amit Varma]: practical applications vis-a-vis each other. And I'm reminded of this quote, like we have
[Amit Varma]: a WhatsApp group for the writing class that I had on all the writing students of the past.
[Amit Varma]: So one of them, Sahil Khanwala of the Indian dream podcast, by the way, a podcast that
[Amit Varma]: I once appeared on as a guest, and the first line of the show notes was something to the
[Amit Varma]: effect of we will now speak to India's most famous podcaster. And I said, What is this
[Amit Varma]: stuff that they've got Narendra Modi on? But no, it wasn't the brains behind monkey bath.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, so Sahil Khanwala of the Indian dream podcast said in this message that he
[Amit Varma]: sent out of context, so it's, it was in a different context, but it fits this very well.
[Amit Varma]: And what he said was, quote, a friend of mine once said, you know what the problem is with
[Amit Varma]: being an economist, everyone has an opinion about the economy. No one goes up to a geologist
[Amit Varma]: and says igneous rocks are fucking bullshit. Stop quote. And you know, igneous rocks, you
[Amit Varma]: cannot argue with igneous rocks, they are there. But all these things that economists
[Amit Varma]: talk about seem so counterintuitive, everyone has an opinion, everyone argues on the basis
[Amit Varma]: of whatever and in the social sciences, it becomes hard to actually prove things in a
[Amit Varma]: way that is convincing for everyone. So all these ideologies can flourish. So tell me
[Amit Varma]: a little bit about you know, while learning public policy, what are the sort of mental
[Amit Varma]: shifts that you made while learning about economics and public policy? Because I remember
[Amit Varma]: when I kind of grew up as a kid in the 80s, and even hit adulthood in the 90s, such as
[Amit Varma]: it is, I mean, I don't know if anyone is ever fully an adult at a certain point in your
[Amit Varma]: middle age, you realize everyone is winging it. But as I gradually got older, initially,
[Amit Varma]: you had this vague leftist kind of mindset that hey, the state will solve everything
[Amit Varma]: and things can be planned. And you don't really understand how market works in the same exploitative
[Amit Varma]: because you're looking at the world in zero some ways. And then gradually, at some point,
[Amit Varma]: a light bulb goes off, hopefully, and you begin to understand how that works. And for
[Amit Varma]: me, the two big light bulbs in my mind was understanding how society slash markets work
[Amit Varma]: in terms of positive sumness, spontaneous order, all of those things, which changed
[Amit Varma]: the way I look at the world. And the other big one was just learning about natural selection,
[Amit Varma]: what it was that human beings were, you know, once you understand natural selection, and
[Amit Varma]: the role of evolution and shaping us, you get so much closer to understanding human
[Amit Varma]: nature and sort of also closer to rejecting false narratives like religion and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So those were my kind of two light bulb moments, as it were, were there any light bulb moments
[Amit Varma]: for you that you can kind of identify that suddenly, you know, once the switch comes
[Guest]: on, everything kind of looks different? Yeah, I think so many concepts in basic economics
[Guest]: microeconomics are like that, no, just like you said, positive some thing, right. So voluntary
[Guest]: exchange being positive for both sides who are taking part in it is such a mind blowing
[Guest]: concept, right. And yet, a lot of us will still not appreciate it, right. We always
[Guest]: think one side is exploited, and one side is the exploiter. One person, I mean, very
[Guest]: in a conference that I did, I don't know the name is so apologies for that. They use
[Guest]: this word, they said, don't use the phrase haves versus have nots, but use haves versus
[Guest]: want to haves. It's not haves and want to have. So it was so fascinating, right? It's
[Guest]: haves versus have nots always puts you in this mindset of, there is a confrontation,
[Guest]: there's never a competition or a cooperation, it's always one against the other. But reality
[Guest]: is you have, everyone wants the same thing, whether it's the haves or the want to haves,
[Guest]: it's just that some people already are ahead, some people are not and you know, it's,
[Guest]: and it opens up the possibility of cooperation, exchange, even competition. So I think that
[Guest]: was really something which I still think of. So that that is one idea. The other thing
[Guest]: just the simple concept of opportunity cost is so mind blowing. And it has so many implications
[Guest]: on public policy as well, especially when a state like ours, which is doing so many
[Guest]: things with so less resources. For that, this idea of opportunity cost becomes so important,
[Guest]: right? So there's a really nice paper, Amit, and I am saying this because I know you talk
[Guest]: about this and discuss this a lot about how people think very differently when they are
[Guest]: talking about what should be done with their own money, versus what should be done with
[Guest]: government money, right? And the essential idea behind that is that people, we intuitively
[Guest]: don't get opportunity cost. So there is opportunity cost, neglect is far more common when it comes
[Guest]: to public policy, rather than when it is when it comes to personal decisions. So this is
[Guest]: empirically proven. There's a paper we can link. People did an experiment, asked people
[Guest]: about their decisions. And they found that when they were talking about their own decisions,
[Guest]: they were always conscious of their own time, their own money, how is it being utilized,
[Guest]: it won't be utilized for something else if I put into this cause. But when they were
[Guest]: talking about government and public health, that was a topic they picked up. They were
[Guest]: just not thinking of opportunity cost. Their belief was that the government can do everything.
[Guest]: The government has infinite resources, and the government should do this. We've elected
[Guest]: them. So why can't the government just make things, a utopian world come alive? Why can't
[Guest]: the government do that? So that is the mindset which a lot of us start with, even I started
[Guest]: with. But once you learn opportunity cost, you just know, you know that, no, that's not
[Guest]: possible. To get something, you have to lose something. So there is some, you do some things
[Guest]: and the government will not have time, money for other things. So why not concentrate your
[Guest]: efforts on the things that governments are supposed to do, rather than what you wish
[Guest]: them to do. So that was one really important idea. And then several other ideas, just generally
[Guest]: about public policy. I would also begin by saying that economic reasoning is the science
[Guest]: behind public policy, but it's not the only science as such. So it is, forms the core,
[Guest]: but you also need, because it's an applied discipline, public policy, you will also need
[Guest]: knowledge from say, social psychology, knowledge from a whole bunch of other disciplines, sociology
[Guest]: and history, so many other things you need to know in order to make sense of the real
[Guest]: world, right, which will be infinitely more complex than what even economic reasoning
[Guest]: can tell us, you know, so that is also to be added. Going beyond that, any other idea,
[Guest]: just learning about, I had written this about what people should unlearn before learning
[Guest]: public policy, you know, so I just wanted to tell those things, because they were what
[Guest]: hit me when I started in this discipline first.
[Amit Varma]: We'll come to that next, you had made a video on it also, 8 things, which we'll link from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes. And in fact, we can come to it right now. But before that, you know, just
[Amit Varma]: a couple of asides. One is, as you point out, and I had mentioned earlier that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: people don't go out and express their views on geology, or say how to design a rocket
[Amit Varma]: to experts. But they do that in economics, because it just seems that, you know, everyone
[Amit Varma]: can have a theory that can fit in different opposite theories appear to fit. And why is
[Amit Varma]: that and a one reason for that is that in the social sciences, it's very hard to get
[Amit Varma]: at the truth because it is so multifactorial, like a great illustration of this, which our
[Amit Varma]: mutual friend Shruti Rajgopalan had once given me is that, you know, imagine you want to
[Amit Varma]: find out if dropping a coin in water raises the level of the water, right? And obviously
[Amit Varma]: it does, because you know, the coin is part of it. Now, it's very easy to do this in a
[Amit Varma]: lab because you can take two beakers with the same amount of water and put a coin in
[Amit Varma]: one and you can measure and everything is controlled. But imagine trying to do this
[Amit Varma]: in a swimming pool, that you drop a coin in a swimming pool where people are splashing
[Amit Varma]: around all over the place and you're trying to measure the level. And it is simply not
[Amit Varma]: useful because there are so many other factors that you can't prove it one way or the other
[Amit Varma]: and you will have all kinds of differing theories on it and then it just becomes an ideological
[Amit Varma]: battle. So this is one way in which economics which is a study of human behaviour is kind
[Amit Varma]: of different from say the study of metals or whatever, because human behaviour is so
[Amit Varma]: complex and so many other things go into it, especially when you kind of zoom out of what
[Amit Varma]: one individual may be thinking or doing and look at a different level. As far as positive
[Amit Varma]: someness is concerned, my favourite metaphor for that is what John Stossel called the double
[Amit Varma]: thank you moment. And, you know, old listeners of the show will perhaps find that I'm repeating
[Amit Varma]: myself. But I love this as a metaphor, where Stossel invokes someone who goes into buy
[Amit Varma]: a coffee at a Starbucks. And I mean, he didn't say Starbucks, I'm saying Starbucks, but goes
[Amit Varma]: into buy coffee at a Starbucks and he pays for the coffee. And as the person hands him
[Amit Varma]: the coffee, he says thank you and the person handing him the coffee says thank you. So
[Amit Varma]: it's a double thank you. And what happened here is that he values a coffee more than
[Amit Varma]: the money he paid for it. And the Starbucks values the money more than the coffee they're
[Amit Varma]: giving out. It's a positive sum game and through such voluntary exchanges is how we all get
[Amit Varma]: better off. So it's not a zero sum game. It's not that to get richer, the poor must get
[Amit Varma]: poorer, which would be terrible and exploitative and dystopian. But that's actually not how
[Amit Varma]: the world works. And you also mentioned this paper, which of course, I linked from the
[Amit Varma]: show notes, but it reminds me of, you know, Friedman had this beautiful two by two matrix
[Amit Varma]: of spending money, he pointed out that, you know, if you spend your own money on yourself,
[Amit Varma]: you economize and you seek the highest value. Whereas if you spend your own money on someone
[Amit Varma]: else you economize, but you don't care so much about the value because you're not the
[Amit Varma]: beneficiary. If you spend someone else's money on yourself, you don't economize because it's
[Amit Varma]: not your money, but you seek the highest value because you're benefiting. And if you spend
[Amit Varma]: someone else's money on someone else, you don't economize and you don't seek value either.
[Amit Varma]: You behave as if money falls from the sky and whatever, whatever. And that's basically
[Amit Varma]: government spending, right? I want to ask you about these eight things to unlearn before
[Amit Varma]: you learn about public policy. But before we go there, let's talk a little bit more
[Amit Varma]: about economic reasoning. Like when I heard the phrase for the first time, I can't remember
[Amit Varma]: what I thought, obviously, where were you when so and so died? Or where were you when
[Amit Varma]: India won the World Cup? Where were you when you first heard the phrase economic reasoning?
[Amit Varma]: I don't remember, but economic reasoning must have seemed to me very dull and boring as
[Amit Varma]: if it is something to do with numbers and charts and tables and all of that. But economic
[Amit Varma]: reasoning, I find is fundamental to how we make every decision we make in our lives,
[Amit Varma]: at least as a good lens to look at all of that and to in fact, make better decision
[Amit Varma]: and live one's life better or look back on one's mistakes. So tell me a little bit more
[Amit Varma]: about what you understand by the term economic reasoning and how your process of learning
[Guest]: it and teaching it was. Yeah, so just adding to what you just mentioned before, Amit, about
[Guest]: the comparison of throwing a coin in a lake and seeing the water rise. Yeah, the difference
[Guest]: is that the respondents on of anything that the government does have agency of their own,
[Guest]: right. So and the way they work, their motivations will be so vastly different, that even economic
[Guest]: reasoning by itself cannot capture all those, right. So there's a great book by Tyler Cowen,
[Guest]: right, Discovering Your Inner Economist. And he also writes about, you know, economists
[Guest]: also often make a caricature of themselves by saying that, you know, just you know how
[Guest]: incentives work, and then you can say how the world works. That's not how it is, you
[Guest]: know, even incentives are so complex, the cultural context varies, the incentive of
[Guest]: a person in India might be very different from the incentive of a similarly placed person
[Guest]: in the US. So understanding that cultural context, understanding why people think the
[Guest]: way they do is so important to understanding, even making some sense of the world. So that's
[Guest]: why along with economic reasoning, you would need so many other disciplines to just make
[Guest]: some sense of these motivations, right. Be that as it may, now when we think of economic
[Guest]: reasoning itself, one really powerful insight that economic reasoning sort of gives me is,
[Guest]: it helps you to anticipate the unintended, right. So one great thing that I had learned,
[Guest]: and this was by a lecture by Pratap Bhanumetha himself, he mentioned in a class that not
[Guest]: everything that is unintended is unanticipated, right. So you generally when people have this
[Guest]: conception of something going wrong by the government, we often say that was unintended
[Guest]: effects, right, like, whatever, demonetization happened, but yeah, unintended effects, some
[Guest]: good happened, but how can the government have predicted what can happen? So it was
[Guest]: unintended, right. But the key insight is that no, that's not the way it is, you know,
[Guest]: you can anticipate some things which are unintended, even before a policy is done. So you don't
[Guest]: need to actually experiment on millions of citizens and then figure out that, you know,
[Guest]: when you put a price cap, that item will just stop selling or quality will degrade. You
[Guest]: absolutely don't need to do that and learn, but we still do that, right, the government
[Guest]: will still price stents and then figure out, oh, stents have disappeared, why have that
[Guest]: happened? So economic reasoning is what gives you that lens, right, you are able to, a key
[Guest]: component of anticipating the unintended, if you know basic economic reasoning, right.
[Guest]: So if you know what will happen when you put a price floor, if you know what happens when
[Guest]: price cap is put, when a tax is put, there will be deadweight losses, you know, so such
[Guest]: things if you have in mind, you are really able to make better public policies, right.
[Guest]: So that's why even in our teaching, we always tell people, however uncomfortable you are
[Guest]: with this word economics, there's no way around it when you are in public policy, irrespective
[Guest]: of the discipline that you are, you know, you might be doing things in environment policy
[Guest]: or climate change policy, or even local government related policy, you will still need economic
[Guest]: reasoning, which is, many times people don't start with that prior, right, they think like
[Guest]: economics is just one subject, which you have to learn, you have to get credits for, but
[Guest]: it's not that way, you know, it is a discipline that runs across all domains of public policy.
[Guest]: So being armed with certain tools from that particular discipline is really key.
[Guest]: And it will help you anticipate the unintended and stop and it won't allow you to make stupid
[Guest]: policies, right, you will be able to at least say that, yeah, this sounds great, everyone
[Guest]: benefits, there's a great policy, but then you will be able to say, okay, there are things
[Guest]: that might go wrong if you apply the economic reasoning.
[Guest]: So that is like one big idea that economic reasoning helps in.
[Guest]: The second thing is about just this idea of marginal cost and marginal benefit, right.
[Guest]: So economic reasoning is very consequentialist in its approach, right, so it is always thinking
[Guest]: of consequences, not intentions and things like that.
[Guest]: So in policy that matters a lot, right, you have interested people to do something, you
[Guest]: are electing them, there is a huge amount of money that is at their disposal, force
[Guest]: at their disposal.
[Guest]: So you want them to be judged by consequences, right.
[Guest]: So that's why what happens is having marginal cost and marginal benefit and comparing whether
[Guest]: a policy should be done based on benefits exceeding cost is important.
[Guest]: Often you will notice, Amit, people will justify a policy based on just the good that it can
[Guest]: bring, right.
[Guest]: So we'll just say, oh, CSR policy is so great, corporate social responsibility, because I
[Guest]: saw a lake near my house, which is so well done.
[Guest]: And that's why CSR policy should be implemented.
[Guest]: So you're just looking at a small benefit of that policy.
[Guest]: But what were the costs of that, you know, what could that money have been better utilized
[Guest]: by the company itself, instead of you having it to submit to the government or your government
[Guest]: forcing you to do that particular thing, right.
[Guest]: So those costs need to be kept in mind, and that is a key idea, I think economic reasoning
[Guest]: again can teach.
[Guest]: The next like really mind blowing insight is just market failures, right, that codification
[Guest]: of four or five kinds of market failures gives you such a real, really important lens to
[Guest]: look at the world, right.
[Guest]: So when you see pollution happens, right, you try to think of, okay, what is the market
[Guest]: failure?
[Guest]: And then once you think of, okay, once this is the particular type of market failure,
[Guest]: then you can map a government solution to that particular market failure.
[Guest]: So I think you had Ajay Shah on the podcast a couple of times, and his book does this
[Guest]: really well.
[Guest]: But I'll still repeat it just for people who might be interested, that the fact that we
[Guest]: know there are four or five market failures, right.
[Guest]: So you have a negative externalities, positive externalities, market power, information asymmetry
[Guest]: and public goods.
[Guest]: So broadly five.
[Guest]: So once you are able to classify a failure, let's look at vaccines, right.
[Guest]: So first question you ask is, okay, what should government do about vaccines?
[Guest]: So then you ask, what is the market failure, right?
[Guest]: So is it a public good?
[Guest]: Is it a negative externality, positive externality, whatever, right.
[Guest]: And a lot of people would think vaccines are public goods, which they are not, right.
[Guest]: So they are private goods with positive externalities, right.
[Guest]: So you taking a vaccine benefits me, even though I'm not involved in that transaction.
[Guest]: So that is what a positive externality is.
[Guest]: So now once you know what a market failure is, you can map which government action is
[Guest]: best suited for that kind of market failure, right.
[Guest]: And in the Shah and Kelkar book, they had these three ideas, right.
[Guest]: Produce, finance, regulate.
[Guest]: And you know that once you have something which is positive externalities, that's a
[Guest]: market failure, the best government intervention would be to finance the recipients, right.
[Guest]: So in this case, it would be you give vaccines for free, right, or you subsidize it or whatever.
[Guest]: So it gives you a solution just by thinking in a structured way, right.
[Guest]: Think of the market failure, think of what are the possible solutions.
[Guest]: But instead, people might often think that, oh, vaccines are public goods, so government
[Guest]: should even produce it.
[Guest]: And then you enter into a whole different idea of governments trying to build its capacity
[Guest]: to make vaccines, to produce vaccines, and we know how that would work out, right.
[Guest]: So just this idea of having market failures and thinking that, you know, if there's a
[Guest]: positive externality, financing may be a best solution.
[Guest]: If it's a public good market failure, then maybe government production is justified to
[Guest]: a sense.
[Guest]: And if there are the other market failures, negative externalities, market power or information
[Guest]: asymmetry, best ways for regulation, one way or the other, governments come in to stop
[Guest]: the excesses of people who are deviating from the law, right.
[Guest]: And this is such an important framework, right, if we just learn this, maybe we'll demand
[Guest]: better policies and understand when governments take other routes, right.
[Guest]: So yeah, this was like, the main ideas that I think are really core from economic reasoning,
[Guest]: and we should learn making better policies and even making sense of the news.
[Guest]: Forget about whether you want to be in the government or not.
[Guest]: But just if you want to parse the news, these ideas can help.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll kind of add to that by talking a little bit more about economic reasoning in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that even though it's called economic reasoning, it's really reasoning.
[Amit Varma]: You know, economics is after all, the study of human behavior.
[Amit Varma]: So when I teach my writing course, for example, and over 1200 students have suffered through
[Amit Varma]: it over the last 15 months.
[Amit Varma]: When I teach my writing course, I often talk about, you know, I bring up economic reasoning
[Amit Varma]: without calling it that, so it doesn't seem so intimidating.
[Amit Varma]: For example, one of the points I want to I make right at the start of the course is that
[Amit Varma]: we have to keep the reader at the forefront of our consideration, you know, too often,
[Amit Varma]: when people sit down to write, they imagine that the act of writing is something that
[Amit Varma]: is happening between them and their laptop, like I have thoughts in my head, I put it
[Amit Varma]: out on the laptop or write it on a piece of paper and the writing is done.
[Amit Varma]: But the writing only becomes meaningful when it has an intended effect on the intended
[Amit Varma]: reader.
[Amit Varma]: So you have to keep the reader at the heart of it.
[Amit Varma]: And the way I kind of try to get this through is talking about opportunity cost is that
[Amit Varma]: what could you be doing instead of attending this webinar, as it were, you know, you could
[Amit Varma]: be reading a book, you could be watching Netflix, you could be watching YouTube, you could be
[Amit Varma]: sleeping, all those opportunity cost.
[Amit Varma]: So whenever someone reads anything by you, they are paying a huge price in terms of time
[Amit Varma]: and time is money, so they are paying time and money, and also attention and energy,
[Amit Varma]: which are separate points, reading something you have written.
[Amit Varma]: So it is such an enormous privilege, and you should feel so grateful that someone is reading
[Amit Varma]: anything by you.
[Amit Varma]: And instead, so many writers seem to feel entitled to readers, they take it for granted,
[Amit Varma]: and we actually need to work hard.
[Amit Varma]: And which is why I say that, you know, bad writing is equal to bad behavior.
[Amit Varma]: Because bad writing, I define as writing that wastes a reader's time, and it's absolutely
[Amit Varma]: bad behavior.
[Amit Varma]: And you can use the economic lens to look at other aspects of writing.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, there are situations in which you don't want to write long sentences.
[Amit Varma]: And there are situations in which you do because you're building that kind of longer rhythm.
[Amit Varma]: So you'll often face what an economist would call a trade off that, you know, longer sentences
[Amit Varma]: are harder to process, which is a negative side of the trade off.
[Amit Varma]: But the positive side of the trade off is that maybe they are creating an immersive
[Amit Varma]: effect and a slow rhythm that you want to for that particular essay or story you might
[Amit Varma]: be writing.
[Amit Varma]: So writers face choices at every moment, when they are writing, kahan pe full stop dalna
[Amit Varma]: hai, kahan pe para break karna hai.
[Amit Varma]: Every choice involves trade offs, because there are no definitive answers of this is
[Amit Varma]: good and this is bad.
[Guest]: So economic reasoning can help.
[Guest]: Maybe you can add even transaction costs to this, right?
[Guest]: Just the fact that you if you use complicated words, if you're trying to show off your literary
[Guest]: flair, then you're actually increasing transaction costs of a person who's reading it, right?
[Amit Varma]: So you would want to minimize that.
[Amit Varma]: Harder for them to process.
[Amit Varma]: This is what I keep saying that, you know, don't say when you can say stop, why would
[Amit Varma]: you use a phrase like put an end to all those words where one is enough, you're just being
[Amit Varma]: rude to the reader, which is not to say you dumb it down, you what you want to say is
[Amit Varma]: what you want to say, you never compromise, you never dumb it down, but find the most
[Amit Varma]: efficient way of saying it that is courteous to the reader and respects the time.
[Amit Varma]: And you sort of mentioned stance and you know, when that decision happened, and basically
[Amit Varma]: for listeners who may not be aware, I think three or four years ago, this government put
[Amit Varma]: a price cap on stance and they said, Oh, people can't afford stance, so we'll put a price
[Amit Varma]: cap and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember tweeting at that time, or maybe I wrote in an article, I don't remember, but
[Amit Varma]: I remember putting it out there in the public, that this will lead to shortages, price gaps
[Amit Varma]: always lead to shortages, period.
[Amit Varma]: This is economics 101 economic reasoning.
[Amit Varma]: And and that's exactly what happened.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't even remember you and I might even have discussed it on one of my Bangalore
[Amit Varma]: trips, but it was just so obvious that this is going to happen.
[Amit Varma]: And that's also a profound point you made about how something that is unintended can
[Amit Varma]: nevertheless be anticipated.
[Amit Varma]: And an example of that, if I might do a humble brag is both Demon and GST, like Demon from
[Amit Varma]: day one, I started writing columns and did episodes and why it would be a disaster and
[Amit Varma]: it was and before GST was announced, I did an episode with Devanshu Dutta, breaking down
[Amit Varma]: why even though it was well intentioned, all the different things that would go wrong,
[Amit Varma]: and they all did, right, we were kind of completely spot on there.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing is, one core fallacy is in fact, the first one you talk about when
[Amit Varma]: you want people to unlearn certain things, you know, before you think about public policy,
[Amit Varma]: the first of those was that good intentions matter, that if something is well intentioned,
[Amit Varma]: it's a good policy.
[Amit Varma]: And the example of the price cap on stents shows that no, the intentions were the best,
[Amit Varma]: the outcome was the worst. And similarly, we see a lot of our discourse is so shallow
[Amit Varma]: in terms of interpreting policy in terms of intentions, like for example, last year, when
[Amit Varma]: the labor laws were sort of, you know, there were changes in the labor laws, and people
[Amit Varma]: kept defending these labor laws as if they were a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: Now, these labor laws say good things, and they were made with good intentions, but they
[Amit Varma]: had disastrous outcomes, which pretty much all economists have been in agreement about
[Amit Varma]: for 25 years.
[Amit Varma]: But just because an absolutely wild government, in this case, a UP government said that we'll
[Amit Varma]: abolish the labor laws, everybody was up in arms and said, Oh, look, the labor laws are
[Amit Varma]: protecting workers and all, whereas actually, no, they were harming workers.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you can't go by intention, you have to go by outcome.
[Amit Varma]: And the outcome is completely foreseeable.
[Amit Varma]: This was the first of your points that don't go by good intentions.
[Amit Varma]: Is this something that you'd like to elaborate upon?
[Amit Varma]: Is it something that is a slightly difficult point to get across to your students?
[Amit Varma]: Because it is a little counterintuitive?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: This is, I think, the toughest point to get across, right?
[Guest]: And I mean, we all fall to this, right?
[Guest]: Because we all think of intentions, when we think of governments, yeah, you know, he had
[Guest]: good intentions, or she had good intentions at heart.
[Guest]: So that that once you start from that mindset, it's difficult to process that or how can
[Guest]: something which was started so well go wrong.
[Guest]: And even if it goes wrong, then you will say, Oh, it was unintended.
[Guest]: So it may be some effects will be there, right?
[Guest]: So but that's where the idea is, right?
[Guest]: Because you are managing such a complex system, just good intentions are no guarantee of getting
[Guest]: good outcomes.
[Guest]: And in fact, it is very important for us to understand how human motivations work, what
[Guest]: are the kinds of things that might go wrong, and then you make your policy based on that.
[Guest]: So the example that I give is of prohibition, right?
[Guest]: So when prohibition started, yeah, good intentions, right?
[Guest]: Stop alcoholism, at least that is the stated intent.
[Guest]: So you say, okay, what's the best way to do this, you stop people from having alcohol
[Guest]: itself.
[Guest]: And once you had that prohibition in 50s and 60s, in Bombay, etc, also, it was there, and
[Guest]: you had those really long run consequences, you know, so you because of prohibition, you
[Guest]: had an underworld, which started doing, of course, you know, suddenly people will not
[Guest]: stop drinking alcohol, because one good intention, CM has said, right?
[Guest]: It is in an inelastic demand, right?
[Guest]: So people would still want it just means that your demand will suddenly not drop because
[Guest]: someone has said so.
[Guest]: So you people want that demand to be served, it got served through other means.
[Guest]: And the people who are supplying these are the people who are obviously outside the law,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So they basically gained material wealth, they gained social wealth, they basically
[Guest]: became richer, and they gained a lot of standing higher standing in the society as well, right?
[Guest]: So those were also the people who eventually became use that money for smuggling and whole
[Guest]: lot of other things, you know.
[Guest]: So such a small action that you will just think are born out of such noble intentions,
[Guest]: actually had such disastrous consequences, right?
[Guest]: You add a whole lot of underworld, mafia, and so many things which are related.
[Guest]: Now, we can't say what percentage of it was due to this, that would be difficult.
[Guest]: But there is a causal chain, which maps to it, you know, so it's really important.
[Guest]: Another example that I give for this is just this idea of MSP and connection with the daily
[Guest]: smog, right?
[Guest]: It's such a profound connection, right?
[Guest]: So then, I think we'll just trace it just for the fun of it.
[Guest]: So daily smog happens, what is the biggest reason people say it's the crop residue, right?
[Guest]: So first question we ask is, okay, if it is crop residue, then why can't we stop it?
[Guest]: So one thing would be, okay, why don't you stagger it, right?
[Guest]: The whole reason it's happening is because most people are burning that crop at the same
[Guest]: particular point of time, it's really short window.
[Guest]: So the idea is, why can't you stagger it?
[Guest]: So staggering should resolve that problem.
[Guest]: But that staggering is not possible, because I think before July 15, you can't grow a Kharif
[Guest]: crop, because the government has put a restriction, the some Punjab Subsoil Act 2009.
[Guest]: That you can't grow a paddy before that.
[Guest]: So what happens is most people end up delaying their crop, and hence they have very little
[Guest]: time before the next Rabi season starts.
[Guest]: So what they do is in that short period, the only way to get rid is all of them burning
[Guest]: their crop residues together, right?
[Guest]: So that's a problem.
[Guest]: So now the question you ask is, why did the government put this law in place?
[Guest]: The reason is that during that time, Punjab and those regions have severe water shortage
[Guest]: summer, peak summer, so they don't want water to be used for growing paddy.
[Guest]: So the government has put this restriction.
[Guest]: Now you go again one step back, right?
[Guest]: Why are people growing paddy in the first place when there is no water?
[Guest]: And then you realize that it is because you have distorted the incentives by saying that
[Guest]: we will give you money for growing this particular crop, right?
[Guest]: And that's what is the MSP, which government gives.
[Guest]: So you see the entire chain of MSP actually leading to the disastrous consequences.
[Guest]: No person could have imagined it back then, right, that, you know, suddenly, this might
[Guest]: happen, Delhi smog might happen, probably they wouldn't have imagined way back in the
[Amit Varma]: 60s.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I want to add to this because there's a lot else and all of them have good intentions.
[Amit Varma]: Like you said, this MSP is a good intention that hey, we'll support the farmers and we'll
[Amit Varma]: give this price and they'll grow paddy.
[Amit Varma]: But the other thing is that despite this, because this rice is a water intensive crop,
[Amit Varma]: they would not have grown rice, had it not been for free electricity, again, free electricity
[Amit Varma]: to farmers is given with the best intentions.
[Amit Varma]: But what they did with it is they built a lot of dew bells or whatever it is with which
[Amit Varma]: you get water out of the surface, which allowed them to actually grow rice, which they otherwise
[Amit Varma]: would not have.
[Amit Varma]: So you have a combination of the MSP, the free electricity to the farmers, the absolutely
[Amit Varma]: the best intentions, and you have this perverse situation where people in Delhi can't breathe
[Amit Varma]: and every day is like smoking 30-40 cigarettes or something of the sort.
[Amit Varma]: And these are unintended consequences.
[Amit Varma]: And the point is, are they unforeseeable?
[Amit Varma]: Well, to the specific degree that back when MSP was set, you could not have said that
[Amit Varma]: this will cause Delhi smog.
[Amit Varma]: You could not have said that.
[Amit Varma]: But you could have very easily said that markets are going to be distorted, that never ends
[Amit Varma]: well.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, down the road, this will hurt the people that you're trying to help.
[Amit Varma]: And throughout India, we've kind of seen those sort of distortions happening.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned prohibition.
[Amit Varma]: So I also want to sort of give another beautiful phrase, one of my favorite phrases, which
[Amit Varma]: when I was learning about economics, which I learned, and it's a phrase coined by the
[Amit Varma]: regulatory economist Bruce Yandel.
[Amit Varma]: And it's called Baptists and bootleggers.
[Amit Varma]: So the funda here is that when prohibition happens first, why does prohibition happens?
[Amit Varma]: Because people he describes as Baptists will come up and say it is evil to have alcohol
[Amit Varma]: and husbands are beating wives and all of this and they'll make a moral issue out of
[Amit Varma]: it that alcohol should be banned.
[Amit Varma]: So Baptists get alcohol banned, Baptists I'm using in a loose sense, not in a literal sense
[Amit Varma]: here.
[Amit Varma]: But basically, people preaching in a virtuous way about the evils of alcohol will get it
[Amit Varma]: banned.
[Amit Varma]: Who is it good for is good for bootleggers.
[Amit Varma]: Because the moment you ban something like that, the underground market will spring up.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, bootleggers then come into the picture and you know, make a huge profit.
[Amit Varma]: And what this illustrates, this phrase illustrates is that Baptists and bootleggers are actually
[Amit Varma]: perfect allies, which people don't understand.
[Amit Varma]: And the amusing subtext to that is that for a very brief while, I think three or four
[Amit Varma]: years ago, the editor of Huffington Post at the time Huffington Post India, he was a friend
[Amit Varma]: of mine, he saw something I wrote about a film on Facebook, and he said, Why don't you
[Amit Varma]: write film reviews for me.
[Amit Varma]: So I reviewed one film, which I think was Aamir Khan's Dangal where I had a throwaway
[Amit Varma]: line about how of the superstars, he's the only one who can act a little bit something
[Amit Varma]: to that effect.
[Amit Varma]: And Shah Rukh Khan read that and got offended and called up HuffPo and said, Who is this
[Amit Varma]: Amit Verma?
[Amit Varma]: And why is he sniping at me?
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: So anyway, so that moment passed, I wrote another review.
[Amit Varma]: And then two weeks after that, Raees and some terrible Hrithik Roshan film, I don't remember,
[Amit Varma]: they released simultaneously.
[Amit Varma]: And I reviewed Raees, which I completely slammed because it's a terrible film.
[Amit Varma]: Actually, actually, everybody acts very well in that except for one person.
[Amit Varma]: And I slammed the film.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the reasons I slammed the film was this Baptist and bootlegger thing that
[Amit Varma]: his character plays a bootlegger in that.
[Amit Varma]: And when a politician demanding prohibition is passing through the city, they build it
[Amit Varma]: up as an enmity.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm like, this doesn't make sense.
[Amit Varma]: These are allies that they are working together, he should be delighted that a politician wants
[Amit Varma]: to make alcohol illegal because that is his whole danda.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, after this fourth review, the editor sheepishly called me up and he
[Amit Varma]: said that, you know, we've decided no more reviews from you, we'll just handle it internally.
[Amit Varma]: So I didn't delve further into what happened.
[Amit Varma]: But I remembered this in in the context of, you know, the recent scandal earlier this
[Amit Varma]: week, a useless controversy about Tapsee Pannu getting pissed off at Shubhra Gupta's review
[Amit Varma]: in Indian Express.
[Amit Varma]: And Shubhra hadn't even said anything personal.
[Amit Varma]: It was one throwaway line.
[Amit Varma]: And the full Streisand effect came into being because Tapsee Pannu threw a hissy fit about
[Amit Varma]: the review and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it was a fairly good review and, and I actually liked Tapsee Pannu.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm not taking sides, but no reason to throw a hissy fit.
[Amit Varma]: Massive aside, but who would have thunk, by the way, the HuffPost archives got taken off
[Amit Varma]: after that, like I would have linked it from the show notes, but I don't think that review
[Amit Varma]: is on my site.
[Amit Varma]: But what I'll do is I'll look in my email and from the archives, just I'll probably
[Amit Varma]: put it on India Uncut, backdate it to whatever the date was and put it up so people can read
[Guest]: it and see if there was anything to get offended by.
[Guest]: So the opportunity cost of having Amit Verma was to lose Shah Rukh Khan.
[Guest]: Well, to lose Shah Rukh Khan or to lose me.
[Guest]: I mean, for them, that was the trade off.
[Guest]: So they chose what they had to.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: They made a rational choice, by the way.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I would not make that choice as an editor, but I can imagine why they did losing
[Amit Varma]: access and all of that, and why do you want to piss off a superstar of that kind?
[Amit Varma]: So I kind of found it funny.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, so that is the first of the things we have to unlearn.
[Amit Varma]: Good intentions is equal to good policy.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a fallacy.
[Amit Varma]: Good intentions is, you know, you can begin with it.
[Amit Varma]: But very often a policy based on good intentions alone will backfire massively.
[Amit Varma]: And we have seven more to go through and then lots more to go through.
[Amit Varma]: I also want to talk about your path breaking concept of societism, which was first expressed
[Amit Varma]: in an essay that you wrote for Pragati when I was editor of Pragati.
[Amit Varma]: So I almost feel this sort of paternal sense towards that essay of yours.
[Amit Varma]: But we'll take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And then on the other side, we shall resume this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog, India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Pranay Kotesane, public policy scholar, extraordinary about public
[Amit Varma]: policy, about his own life, about kind of the world around us.
[Amit Varma]: Because what we build in our time learning economics and economic reasoning is a prism
[Amit Varma]: through which we can see the world and understand it better as it were.
[Amit Varma]: Now, we were going through the eight misconceptions about public policy per se.
[Amit Varma]: And the first of them, which he elaborated upon before the break is that good intentions
[Amit Varma]: don't necessarily make for good policy.
[Amit Varma]: What's number two?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So the second one is sort of an extension of the first one.
[Guest]: And I'm sure you would have heard this a lot about how we often say that our problem is
[Guest]: that our policies are great on paper, just that implementation me gadbad ho gayi.
[Guest]: Otherwise, policy was everything was good in it.
[Guest]: So that is, again, a fallacy, because a policy is explicitly meant to take implementation
[Guest]: into account.
[Guest]: What else is a policy?
[Guest]: Otherwise, you can at best say it was a good idea, right?
[Guest]: I mean, all of us have great ideas about getting the world, making a world a better place.
[Guest]: But those are just ideas, right?
[Guest]: When you go into the nitty gritties, when you try to see how people will actually interpret
[Guest]: this, how human motivations will play out, those are the things that a policy is precisely
[Guest]: meant to address.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So when we, for example, teach a systematic way of making public policies on a problem,
[Guest]: we expect people to have gone through a step of anticipating the unintended, projecting
[Guest]: the outcomes, looking at the stakeholders, how would they interpret it?
[Guest]: That is what implementation is essentially meant to capture.
[Guest]: So if your policy is not doing that, it can't be a good policy.
[Guest]: Basically, we've not thought through enough, you've just put a diktat on something which
[Guest]: you thought will work great, because it sounds like a great idea in my mind, right?
[Guest]: So that is a big fallacy.
[Guest]: So there's nothing like a bad implementation, good policy.
[Guest]: If your implementation is failing, your policy is also bad.
[Guest]: So that is something we should keep in mind.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, this is something I agree with so much, because for example, when it
[Amit Varma]: came to GST, you know, there were again, people who said that GST was good, the previous government
[Amit Varma]: also wanted it, but implementation was bad.
[Amit Varma]: But no, the point is, the design of the policy was bad, which made it inevitable that everything
[Amit Varma]: would go wrong when the policy came into play.
[Amit Varma]: For example, the way the GST was originally conceived was that you have one rate or at
[Amit Varma]: the most a couple of rates, you simplify everything.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they had actually, even though it's a goods and services tax, they had hyped it
[Amit Varma]: up as a good and simple tax, which is what it should have been.
[Amit Varma]: But instead, it was a bad and complex tax, which is even the title of one of my episodes
[Amit Varma]: on it.
[Amit Varma]: And it was completely foreseeable.
[Amit Varma]: And I will say that before GST was actually passed on this show, The Seen and the Unseen,
[Amit Varma]: Devangshu Dutta and I actually spoke about all the things that would go wrong, because
[Amit Varma]: of the design of the policy.
[Amit Varma]: And all of them did eventually go wrong.
[Amit Varma]: The problem with having multiple rates, the problem with making it so difficult for people
[Amit Varma]: to have to file monthly returns and all the kind of nonsense like my life is like way,
[Amit Varma]: way more complicated because of GST than it was before the impact that it had on small
[Amit Varma]: and medium sized industries.
[Amit Varma]: It was all foreseeable.
[Amit Varma]: So that's a fantastic point that sometimes, you know, the implementation can also be foreseen
[Amit Varma]: if you just look at the design of the policy.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, this is a larger question that I have saved for later, which we'll talk
[Amit Varma]: about when we talk about the Indian state, because in a sense, you can look at the constitution
[Amit Varma]: as a policy document that was written badly, which has led to a state which is a predatory
[Amit Varma]: parasitic state and people can say that the constitution is good but the implementation
[Amit Varma]: is wrong.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's not the case.
[Amit Varma]: It was an example of bad design, but we'll come back to that.
[Amit Varma]: What's the third thing that people should unlearn?
[Guest]: The third point I would say is this notion that politics is disgusting, you know, and
[Guest]: again, you know, a few years back, we had this sense that apathy was the dominant notion
[Guest]: when we thought of government, right, like, why even bother ourselves with it, right?
[Guest]: And because people think that politics is disgusting, only evil people do it and we
[Guest]: are good people.
[Guest]: So we'll not do politics, right?
[Guest]: But we all know, you know, politics starts when three people are in a room, you know,
[Guest]: so there is politics going on even now, right?
[Guest]: Even you, I and listeners said that politics is so essential, not just to human beings,
[Guest]: you know, even primates engage in politics.
[Guest]: So to think of politics as disgusting is a very problematic because as Sir Humphrey Appleby
[Guest]: says, do you know Bernard, what happens when good people don't get power, the bad people
[Guest]: get it.
[Guest]: So that's why politics is important and there's no way around it.
[Guest]: We have to engage in it if we want to make our country a better place, right?
[Guest]: So getting around this idea that politics is disgusting, and that's why I will keep
[Guest]: away and somehow things will be great for me is sort of a fallacy.
[Amit Varma]: And would it then follow from this and the reason why this is important in practical
[Amit Varma]: terms is when people are working in public policy, like yourselves, where you are coming
[Amit Varma]: out with suggestions to governments and interacting with government and trying to get things through.
[Amit Varma]: The reason this is important is that if you just aim for a certain kind of purity, without
[Amit Varma]: considering what are the incentives of politicians or bureaucrats, whatever, then no one will
[Amit Varma]: take you seriously, you won't even be part of the conversation.
[Amit Varma]: And what you instead have to do is you have to tailor your proposals and sell them, keeping
[Amit Varma]: in mind key politician incentives, our constraints, and similar with bureaucrats and similar with
[Amit Varma]: other stakeholders along the way.
[Amit Varma]: So by that, you can kind of get something workable through, you know, and not let the
[Amit Varma]: perfect be the enemy of the good as the cliche goes.
[Amit Varma]: So is that why this is so important in real world terms for people who work within policy
[Amit Varma]: like yourself?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: And a more fundamental reason is that when we think of people who are at the margin,
[Guest]: think of politics as disgusting.
[Guest]: The only people who will be in politics are the partisans, right?
[Guest]: So then you are only in politics because you are playing the Congress versus BJP versus
[Guest]: some other party game.
[Guest]: And then if you are already in that mode, then policies don't matter, right?
[Guest]: Then your party and what the party is doing, what the leader is doing, defines what will
[Guest]: be the implications, how you will interpret policies, right?
[Guest]: The consequences be damned, right?
[Guest]: That will be how it is.
[Guest]: So in order for us who are not on either side to just aim for making things better than
[Guest]: the way they are, you need to keep this notion aside, right?
[Guest]: And you will encounter it in any policy space that you go, right?
[Guest]: There's no policy space where you will not have to look at the cognitive maps of all
[Guest]: the people, you know, what their goals are, what they imagine causality is, how they think,
[Guest]: and what they think the others think.
[Guest]: All those things you need to map in order to do just good stakeholder management and
[Guest]: get a policy change actually happen.
[Guest]: I'll give you an example of this, Amit.
[Guest]: This pension reform which happened in 2004, I think I would count it as an example of
[Guest]: one policy which did manage to do this really well, you know.
[Guest]: So the thing was, basically, until then, the civil service pension, the way it worked was,
[Guest]: you got the pension, it was a defined benefit pension, right?
[Guest]: You always got that pension, irrespective of government's finances, it's a promise
[Guest]: that the government has made to you.
[Guest]: And they wanted to transition it to a contribution scheme, right?
[Guest]: So you contribute, the government also contribute, and from that corpus, you get that money later.
[Guest]: Now, if you look at it, the first reaction you would think to this is, there will be
[Guest]: massive protests, right?
[Guest]: Like, why will anyone agree to it?
[Guest]: That to someone in the government who's used to all this.
[Guest]: But this policy change happened so smoothly that we haven't even heard of it.
[Guest]: It's not in our public imagination at all, right?
[Guest]: And why was that?
[Guest]: Because there was a really neat solution to that.
[Guest]: The way the people did this is, one, it didn't apply to people who were already in the government
[Guest]: back then.
[Guest]: It was not backdated.
[Guest]: It started for people who were not in the government at that point of time.
[Guest]: So it was a front-ended scheme, right?
[Guest]: So you removed the opposition that might have come in an organized manner from say unions
[Guest]: back then, right?
[Guest]: The second thing that you did was you also promised a higher outgo to people who are
[Guest]: coming in because government was contributing an additional, whatever, 10% from their kitty
[Guest]: and the people who are going to join in, they are going to contribute 10%, right?
[Guest]: So there is an added incentive for people who are joining in as well, right?
[Guest]: A small one, but nevertheless an important one.
[Guest]: So when this change happened, so basically you have managed even the concentrated loss
[Guest]: that people would have imagined very nicely, right?
[Guest]: You didn't have those protests.
[Guest]: So once we think of what are the various interests, what are the way people might react and then
[Guest]: try to get a policy around that, then it is possible.
[Guest]: So we need to take that into account.
[Guest]: I think something similar could also have been done with Air India long back, right?
[Guest]: You could have just, you know that there will be people who will oppose it who are already
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: So maybe you take care of them in some way or the other, but you don't need to run an
[Guest]: airlines just to pay people their salaries.
[Guest]: So that's why I think understanding politics, understanding interest groups is important.
[Guest]: There's no way around it.
[Guest]: Otherwise a great policy solution might not work.
[Guest]: So that's why what we say is always think of whatever policy solution you have.
[Guest]: Imagine the outcome that you want, the world as it would be if your policy were to be implemented.
[Guest]: Imagine that world and imagine the world now.
[Guest]: Then the gap which exists between them, how do you transition from this to that is an
[Guest]: important learning to imagine.
[Guest]: Then when you try to project these outcomes at that point of time, you will notice there
[Guest]: will be politics, there will be alliances, there will be opposition.
[Guest]: And how do you get around that is then the key challenge.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a further question following up on this point before we go to the next learning
[Amit Varma]: we need to make, which is that one, I completely agree with you about how people's political
[Amit Varma]: affiliations can sometimes distort the way that they look at a policy.
[Amit Varma]: For example, the recent farm bills, which were actually almost 20 years in the making
[Amit Varma]: by different experts and incorporated things that everybody across the aisle had at one
[Amit Varma]: time agreed that these were necessary reforms.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't like all nuances of the particular bill, there are some things which can go,
[Amit Varma]: but on the whole, they're a step in the right direction.
[Amit Varma]: But our politics is so polarized that there was never any chance that something like this
[Amit Varma]: would not find protest.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something both the economics and the politics of it is something that I discussed
[Amit Varma]: in detail with Ajay Shah in an episode we did on the farm bills, where we went into
[Amit Varma]: a fair bit of detail, and both of us felt that the bill was great, but the politics
[Amit Varma]: around it, that the Modi government mishandled it completely.
[Amit Varma]: And their approach to the protesters was just completely wrong and out of whack.
[Amit Varma]: And also the anti-democratic way this was passed through, but leave that aside.
[Amit Varma]: And another example of that is the repealing of the labor laws by the UP government last
[Amit Varma]: year.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, maybe the repealing could have been done slightly differently.
[Amit Varma]: But there is no doubt that the labor laws were a blot that they hurt workers far more
[Amit Varma]: than they helped them.
[Amit Varma]: They were in fact, one of the many causes for the continuing poverty across many parts
[Amit Varma]: of the country.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, because of which politician happened to announce it, you know, it became a polarized
[Amit Varma]: issue.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my thing is that in times where politics has become so deeply polarized, perhaps exacerbated
[Amit Varma]: by social media, does that make the art of getting policy through even more difficult?
[Amit Varma]: Because then the question that comes up is like, no matter what you do, you are going
[Amit Varma]: to have mad opposition, you're going to have mad organized opposition to it, no matter
[Amit Varma]: what you do, you know, even if you happen to do something good, because even a broken
[Amit Varma]: clock is right twice a day, you know, even a bad government can get one random policy
[Amit Varma]: right somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: So now you have, of course, been through this for seven in public policy for seven years,
[Amit Varma]: almost as long as Modi ji himself.
[Amit Varma]: So do you feel that that changing landscape makes a difference or do you feel that besides
[Amit Varma]: these kind of big bang reforms, which get in get in the news, there's scope for doing
[Amit Varma]: a lot of small, small things at a local level and all of that, which do make a positive
[Amit Varma]: difference?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think not just local level, you know, it is possible to see still, changes are happening,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: They are not happening in the direction that you or I want to eat them to go.
[Guest]: But changes are happening quick and fast, right, lots of policy changes do get made.
[Guest]: So the idea is that anyways, politics is the art of the possible, right?
[Guest]: So there will be people who will get through, they know how to manage the interests of lot
[Guest]: of people, politicians know it much, much better than you and I do.
[Guest]: So the idea is, can the policy wonk at least propose solutions which they can reasonably
[Guest]: go and present to their constituents, you know.
[Guest]: So that is the idea and the responsibility of the policy wonk that they have thought
[Guest]: through the solutions, thought through the implementation, proposed a transition path,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I think your example of the farm bills is similar to what you said about the GST bill,
[Guest]: I would say, right?
[Guest]: In the sense that, again, yeah, both are great on paper, but implementation went bad, right?
[Guest]: So you could have thought of, you know, see there, you know that there will be people
[Guest]: who will oppose this, the government has literally paid people to grow a crop for 30-40 years
[Guest]: and today, tomorrow it is saying that maybe we won't do that in one way or the other,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So you know that upfront, how do you propose a solution which would have sort of taken
[Guest]: into account this fear, right?
[Guest]: That is, I think, something could have been anticipated, right?
[Guest]: So that's why I would say, again, it is the same fallacy, good policy and bad implementation.
[Guest]: It was not implemented well, so it is not a good policy, it should have thought through
[Guest]: that these are the people who are losing out, okay, so if they are losing out, how do we
[Guest]: make things better for them?
[Guest]: How do we take them along, which wasn't done, right?
[Guest]: So that's where I would put it.
[Amit Varma]: I think this was not so much though the false dichotomy of policy and implementation.
[Amit Varma]: This was more about the often real dichotomy of economics and politics, that sometimes
[Amit Varma]: good economics can be bad politics, you know, or sometimes, you know, the way a politician
[Amit Varma]: might sell an idea can lead you in the wrong direction, either it's, you know, there might
[Amit Varma]: be a good policy which is sold badly, or there might be a bad policy which is sold well,
[Amit Varma]: you know, like a lot of paternalistic policies will be because often the popular or the populist
[Amit Varma]: understanding of economics will contain a lot of things that we know are fallacies,
[Amit Varma]: for example, the zero sumness of everything, the fact that the notion that government spending
[Amit Varma]: has no opportunity cost, which is why, you know, the most popular thing you can offer
[Amit Varma]: farmers before an election is a farm loan waiver.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes the farmers are in such dire straits that it is actually justified anesthesia,
[Amit Varma]: but it is only an immediate painkiller while there is a deeper cancer that has to be sorted
[Amit Varma]: and which is not there in the popular imagination, and there's no demand for it.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, that's that's a kind of a complex problem.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go on to the fourth thing that we need to unlearn about public policy.
[Guest]: Yeah, the fourth one thing, we've discussed it already, just the idea that you judge a
[Guest]: policy by the benefits alone, right.
[Guest]: So that is, again, a fallacy, as we discussed, you need to take into account both costs and
[Guest]: benefits, right.
[Guest]: So the thing is, public policy is what government or any, any of the three organs of the government
[Guest]: do, right.
[Guest]: And the fact that there is so much money going into it, and it is the government, the state
[Guest]: as an institution as force behind it, it can impact all citizens, right, even citizens,
[Guest]: even people who are not in India.
[Guest]: So with that power behind you, obviously, even the worst public policy will generate
[Guest]: some benefits, you know, it's so just to justify a public policy, because you have counted
[Guest]: some small benefits is again, a fallacy, right.
[Guest]: So you need to take into account costs and benefits on both sides, and then say whether
[Guest]: this policy should be implemented or not.
[Guest]: And this is not again, what happens, right.
[Guest]: So you will say, yeah, demonetization, but maybe reduce some underground financing in
[Guest]: one part of the country or something like that and say that, you know, see, there were
[Guest]: benefits.
[Guest]: Yeah, of course, there will be benefit, I can say that in there's no public policy,
[Guest]: which has no benefits, you know, they're even the worst of things.
[Guest]: For example, even COVID had benefits, right.
[Guest]: So yeah, even lockdown had benefits, people will say they could see the shivaliks from
[Guest]: Uttar Pradesh or something.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So that doesn't mean that COVID-19 is a great thing to have happened, right.
[Guest]: So similarly, judging a policy by benefits alone is a fallacy that we need to be aware
[Guest]: of before learning public policy.
[Amit Varma]: And a couple of nuances I'll add to this, not only do you should you calculate costs
[Amit Varma]: and benefits, but it's also important to see, you know, who incurs the costs and who gets
[Amit Varma]: the benefits.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, in the first episode I did on demonetization with Suyash Rai, back when
[Amit Varma]: the show was not four hours, but four minutes or something like that.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things Suyash pointed out is that the issue with demon is that I mean, both
[Amit Varma]: of us were clear that there'll be no benefits despite what they were doubting.
[Amit Varma]: But both of us were clear that even their calculation takes into account that one group
[Amit Varma]: of people will bear substantial costs and another group of people down the line will
[Amit Varma]: get some benefits.
[Amit Varma]: And is that ethical is another question to ask.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one of the issues I have with consequentialism or utilitarianism or whatever, which, you
[Amit Varma]: know, tries to look at the value of an action according to its consequences and basically
[Amit Varma]: looking at costs and benefits is the calculation problem that society is so complex that you
[Amit Varma]: can't possibly figure out the impact of any action.
[Amit Varma]: And when you claim to do so, you are basically doing wishful thinking based on your biases.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, beyond that whole cost benefit analysis or a consequentialist kind of worldview.
[Amit Varma]: Beyond that, there have to be some moral underpinnings that are not open to question.
[Amit Varma]: And I would say like human rights, individual rights, individual freedom.
[Amit Varma]: Those are some of those sort of aspects of which, you know, we should hold sacred and
[Amit Varma]: consider very strongly.
[Amit Varma]: And in the case of something like Demon, we didn't.
[Amit Varma]: It was the largest assault on property rights in human history, as I keep saying, it's almost
[Amit Varma]: become a cliche on the show, but it was.
[Amit Varma]: So just at that deontological level, just at a moral level, it was wrong period.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, the cost benefit calculation didn't even matter, though, obviously, the costs
[Amit Varma]: were far greater than the benefits, if at all there were any.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, to me, it didn't matter because the damage, the suffering that you're
[Amit Varma]: causing, what can possibly justify that?
[Amit Varma]: Of course, I don't intend to shit upon the whole concept of costs and benefits.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, you have to take it into account because there are trade-offs in any action.
[Amit Varma]: And because when you propose a public policy, there is a certain state of affairs in the
[Amit Varma]: world which you are trying to change.
[Amit Varma]: And if it, you know, makes things better, then that's great, except that we need to
[Amit Varma]: consider all angles of it, do some probabilistic thinking and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And I would add to it, even in cost benefits, yes, you will look at concentrated benefits
[Guest]: versus dispersed costs and all that, right?
[Guest]: So it's not just about cost to the government, right?
[Guest]: It's cost to the society as a whole.
[Guest]: So you will take into account these things.
[Guest]: And yeah, I mean, our preference would be that, you know, you don't want to just incur
[Guest]: huge dispersed costs on a large number of people just to achieve some concentrated benefits.
[Guest]: In fact, there's a nice Wilson's interest group matrix that probably we can link to,
[Guest]: where it says that client politics is the easiest to do.
[Guest]: Client politics is when you have concentrated benefits, but dispersed costs, right?
[Guest]: And that's the easiest thing.
[Guest]: But exactly the opposite thing is the toughest type of politics to do, right?
[Guest]: And I think he calls it entrepreneurial politics, but where actually the benefits are dispersed
[Guest]: and the costs are concentrated.
[Guest]: So that is the difficult thing to do.
[Guest]: But I mean, again, as I said, politics is the art of possible.
[Guest]: So people can, we at least we should push the government towards achieving that.
[Guest]: And I know you've discussed this before, but I would put petrol prices also in this category.
[Guest]: It's the same thing, you are incurring so much dispersed costs to a large number of
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: And that doesn't make sense.
[Guest]: It has a lot of attendant costs down the line also.
[Guest]: But just why would you incur that to so many people for achieving whatever you want to
[Guest]: do with the government?
[Amit Varma]: You know, one way of thinking about this is that, let us say that I make a public policy
[Amit Varma]: proposal that every year Pranay Kutasane will get a subsidy from the government of more
[Amit Varma]: than a hundred crores, right?
[Amit Varma]: Now, the benefit of this is, of course, to Mr. Kutasane who gets a hundred crores a year.
[Amit Varma]: What is the cost of it?
[Amit Varma]: It's one rupee for every citizen, a little less than that, depending on what our population
[Amit Varma]: is.
[Amit Varma]: It's less than a rupee for every citizen.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this is what is known as concentrated benefit and dispersed costs.
[Amit Varma]: And because these costs are dispersed, most people won't even know that they are losing
[Amit Varma]: one rupee effectively.
[Amit Varma]: And even if they know that they are losing one rupee, they won't really care enough about
[Amit Varma]: it because that one rupee is not worth the cost of protesting and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And it will probably be unseen anyway.
[Amit Varma]: And where this corrupts the system is that Pranay out of that hundred crores can now
[Amit Varma]: give, it's perfectly rational for him to give 50 crores in bribes to MPs and legislators
[Amit Varma]: and ministers and all of that and say that keep the policy going, bhaiya.
[Amit Varma]: Tumhara bhi fayda, hamara bhi fayda, positive sum game between the two of them, society
[Amit Varma]: loses.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and of course, this interest groups problem is, interest groups and lobbying,
[Amit Varma]: this problem is far worse in the US and here, I think Jonathan Rauch had a great book on
[Amit Varma]: it called Government's End, which I'll link from the show notes, which really goes deeply
[Amit Varma]: into the problem.
[Amit Varma]: But this becomes a problem structurally because all politics then comes down to interest groups
[Amit Varma]: lobbying for whoever they're representing to get a benefit.
[Amit Varma]: Another example of this is, for example, both the Aam Aadmi Party and the BJP at one point
[Amit Varma]: in time, I think the BJP kind of changed his mind eventually, but at one point in time,
[Amit Varma]: they were on the same page when it came to FDI in retail, where they were against it.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason is simple to understand that all the small retailers could easily get together
[Amit Varma]: and form an interest group and lobby and pay off whatever politicians they had to give
[Amit Varma]: and fill the party coffers or whatever party they were supporting, or just form a significant
[Amit Varma]: vote bank as they do in Delhi and say, no, you know, ban FDI.
[Amit Varma]: And who lost through this?
[Amit Varma]: Consumers lost through this because consumers would have got everything cheaper, cheaper
[Amit Varma]: or better, or both had FDI and retail been allowed.
[Amit Varma]: And in the long run, all the money they would have saved would have gone back into the economy
[Amit Varma]: and generated jobs and society would have been much better off.
[Amit Varma]: But those benefits were diffused.
[Amit Varma]: And in this specific case, invisible, because, you know, you can't put a number to it, it's
[Amit Varma]: a scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: And that powerful interest group with, you know, concentrated benefits kind of gets away
[Amit Varma]: and so much of politics is like this that I am sometimes, I sometimes wonder if there
[Amit Varma]: can be any politics outside of this.
[Guest]: No, I just gave you an example of a policy where they were able to overcome exactly this
[Guest]: kind of situation, right?
[Guest]: So I mean, imagine you tell a government person that you won't get pension the way you used
[Guest]: to earlier, what protests would have been there?
[Guest]: There are other examples also computerization of banks, it did happen, there was same fears,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: That no computerization will take away our jobs.
[Guest]: So why should we and but that did happen, right?
[Guest]: So there are many examples, which we don't appreciate because just the way it was done
[Guest]: is unseen, right?
[Guest]: The way these effects were overcome the way interest groups were mollified or taken on
[Guest]: board is unseen.
[Guest]: So we that's why I think we need a better understanding of policy successes, we look
[Guest]: at policy failures, and we can pontificate a lot, you and I know that, okay, these are
[Guest]: the failures, but we need to document our success as well as well, you know, and that
[Guest]: will probably tell us and give us clues as to how do you overcome some of these things.
[Guest]: And for at least I can say there are these two examples, which say it is possible, you
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: No, and that's a profound point in the sense that if you're pushing a policy, the way to
[Amit Varma]: push it is not to go to the people in charge and say that, listen, here are the benefits,
[Amit Varma]: society will benefit, that means nothing.
[Amit Varma]: You also have to consider that who are the people this will hurt?
[Amit Varma]: How do we get past that?
[Amit Varma]: How do we find compromises?
[Amit Varma]: Like you said, politics being the art of the possible, which is all so fascinating to me.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to the fifth thing now, the fifth thing that one should unlearn.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I think this is more of a personal sort of thing.
[Guest]: But just the fact that you need to always defend your model of the world is one again
[Guest]: a fallacy because public policy is different from physics in that sense, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you will not come with really strong, you know, you won't come to blows, at least
[Guest]: you and I probably won't.
[Guest]: Maybe physicists do, but we won't come to blows on some of the things about quantum
[Guest]: mechanics.
[Guest]: But you will come to blows on how the world works or whether government should have capital
[Guest]: punishment or not or things like that, you know.
[Guest]: So the idea is that it is actually, we are not learning if we think that we know how
[Guest]: the world functions, right?
[Guest]: And the whole idea is like how Ambedkar had written about is that consistency is the virtue
[Guest]: of an ass.
[Guest]: And I'm not one of them, like he quoted someone to this effect.
[Guest]: That's the idea, right?
[Guest]: So why would you think that the model that you have has all the answers?
[Guest]: So the more we are open to the fact that, you know, there are complex human motivations,
[Guest]: the way we learn and our models and our priors can change, then we start off on the right
[Guest]: foot by learning public policy.
[Guest]: Otherwise, we just go away, reinforcing the priors with which we began.
[Guest]: And that doesn't help.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's a profound point because like another of the people who did my writing course,
[Amit Varma]: Nishant Jain, who is called Sneaky Art on Twitter, really good artist, does situational
[Amit Varma]: street art.
[Amit Varma]: If he's sitting near you, he's probably drawing you.
[Amit Varma]: So beware of him.
[Amit Varma]: He shared a quote with you, which I just love and the quote is quote, every model is wrong.
[Amit Varma]: Some models are useful, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And that's useful to remember that you might have a model of how the world works at the
[Amit Varma]: state must do everything or that markets will solve everything or whatever the model might
[Amit Varma]: be.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is that you can't get wedded to a model as if it is a religious idea.
[Amit Varma]: You have to always, as John Maynard Keynes said, that when the facts change, I change
[Amit Varma]: my mind.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you do?
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote in response to somebody saying that you said that 10 years ago, now you are
[Amit Varma]: saying this.
[Amit Varma]: And the point is that the real world is so deeply complex that even if you have a mental
[Amit Varma]: model, which is incredibly useful, you always have to be open to, you know, rethinking aspects
[Amit Varma]: of it or just looking or even going against your model, when reality means that your model
[Amit Varma]: in a pure form can't actually be carried out.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, that's that's a profound point, just calling for intellectual humility.
[Guest]: What's the sixth view?
[Guest]: Yeah, sixth is something we've already discussed in the sense how economics is capitalism versus
[Guest]: socialism, that's again a fallacy.
[Guest]: And because it is economics, capitalism versus socialism, I don't need it.
[Guest]: And a lot of people will start with this assumption, you know, that's why economics is useless.
[Guest]: It's about Adam Smith versus Karl Marx, and why should I bother?
[Guest]: But like we've already discussed, economic reasoning is so fundamental to making good
[Guest]: public policies or better public policies that we need to get out of this mindset, right?
[Guest]: Basically, it's nothing to do with capitalism or socialism.
[Guest]: It's just at least microeconomics is just about understanding human behavior.
[Guest]: It's a science of scarcity.
[Guest]: How do you allocate resources when you have scarcity?
[Guest]: That is precisely what public policy will try to address, right?
[Guest]: So that's why just getting out of this mindset is important before you dive in in this domain.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And how do people respond to incentives?
[Amit Varma]: And earlier during our conversation, at some point, I wrote behave on my page.
[Amit Varma]: And that was not an exhortation either to you or to me.
[Amit Varma]: But it's because I meant to plug a book which I forgot to plug, which is Behave by Robert
[Amit Varma]: Sapolsky.
[Amit Varma]: Robert Sapolsky is this great biologist, he also has these incredible lectures on YouTube,
[Amit Varma]: which are linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: It's a wonder that, you know, such people can share their insights and everyone in the
[Amit Varma]: world can listen to it, theoretically.
[Amit Varma]: But what the book is about is it looks at the origins of behavior at several different
[Amit Varma]: levels.
[Amit Varma]: Like if I do something now, right?
[Amit Varma]: Like if you say something and I lose my temper, it will first examine the most proximate cause
[Amit Varma]: what you said and why I lost my temper.
[Amit Varma]: But then it'll go a little further back, what is the neurochemistry of my brain?
[Amit Varma]: What is, you know, did I wake up late and not have breakfast or did I have some disease
[Amit Varma]: a week ago for which I had some medication which changed my imbalance?
[Amit Varma]: So it'll look at that layer of causation.
[Amit Varma]: And like that, it keeps peeling the layers back all the way till you get to prehistoric
[Amit Varma]: times and evolution shaped, you know, the way our brain works and the way we react to
[Amit Varma]: everything and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it makes you kind of realize that there are so many layers of causation behind every
[Amit Varma]: little thing that we do.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes we may not even be kind of aware of what those things are, you know, which
[Amit Varma]: means that it's always important to think of humans as containing these multitudes as
[Amit Varma]: being complex and all these different factors.
[Amit Varma]: So even there, there are limits to, I mean, that fundamental thing that humans respond
[Amit Varma]: to incentives are true, but those incentives aren't just proximate incentives, there's
[Amit Varma]: a lot of other shit going on.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a lot of, you know, what is important is not just defining incentives, but defining
[Amit Varma]: humans.
[Amit Varma]: And humans are, you know, a mix of so many different things.
[Amit Varma]: But I think economic reasoning certainly helps in increasing your chance of, you know, understanding
[Amit Varma]: the world.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, my little mini lecture apart, let's move on to point number seven.
[Guest]: Yeah, point number seven is, again, this idea of experience versus theory, you know, often
[Guest]: will again come across this idea that what works for me works for everyone else, or I
[Guest]: stayed in a village, I know how people work there, or how they respond to policy incentives.
[Guest]: So that's why it will work all across the world, right.
[Guest]: But like, it really ties in nicely to what you mentioned, that, you know, we have our
[Guest]: own limitations of perception and memory, both the way we interpret lead to cognitive
[Guest]: biases.
[Guest]: And there are hundreds of cognitive biases now, documented ones.
[Guest]: And those cognitive biases just say that, you know, just because you saw one thing,
[Guest]: the way it worked, or a one policy, maybe NREGS worked great in your village, and people
[Guest]: actually had benefits for that.
[Guest]: But does that make sense at a national level, you have to go down further, right, you have
[Guest]: to ask the cost, you have to ask what were the unintended effects, and things like that.
[Guest]: It can't be just because you were in a village, and there were great things happened there,
[Guest]: that you justify that entire policy.
[Guest]: So that idea is, again, just something to keep in mind, because you'll always see experience
[Guest]: alone masquerading as good policy knowledge.
[Guest]: And that is something to keep in mind.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I also had a good episode on this with Shruti Rajgopalan and Alex Tabarrok.
[Amit Varma]: And the technical term they used is isomorphic mimicry, where just because you know, one
[Amit Varma]: policy has worked in one place, you try it in another place and assume that it will work.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and that goes well with this Indian tendency of trying to have an answer to everything,
[Amit Varma]: where there's this old joke about how you go on the street of any Indian city and you
[Amit Varma]: ask a passerby, ki wahan kaise jaana hai?
[Amit Varma]: Even if you name a fictional place, they will give you directions, ki dine jaye, phir left
[Amit Varma]: jaye, phir seeda jaye, 200 meter ke baad aap paan wale se pooch lijiye.
[Amit Varma]: Possibly I'm sort of caricaturing it as an Indian trait, where it might be a universal
[Amit Varma]: trait, and we've only noticed it in India.
[Amit Varma]: But nowadays, of course, we have Google Maps.
[Amit Varma]: So thankfully, we don't have to ask so many people, technology kind of really helping
[Amit Varma]: us here.
[Amit Varma]: So what's the eighth thing that we have to unlearn?
[Guest]: Yeah, so the eighth thing is, again, it ties into what we were saying about one rupee of
[Guest]: government spending being the same as one rupee of social spending, you know.
[Guest]: And that's, again, a fallacy because, you know, there's something called a marginal
[Guest]: cost of public finance.
[Guest]: The idea being that the government, when it raises resources, there is some friction because
[Guest]: of which money is lost, right?
[Guest]: So the idea is you can't justify that government say spending 5000 crore on a project, the
[Guest]: cost to society is actually much larger, right?
[Guest]: And I think, again, Shah and Kelkar in their book say that it is 3x, right?
[Guest]: So it might be the cost to society is probably 15,000 crores for a 5000 crore rupee that
[Guest]: government has raised and intends to spend for the perfect of causes.
[Guest]: So the way you would go about this is you need to ask the question, what is the government
[Guest]: using this money on?
[Guest]: Is the benefit of that more than 15,000 crores, not 5000 crores, right?
[Guest]: That would be your comparison point.
[Guest]: And that is another important thing to learn because that way we will think of governments
[Guest]: raising money in a different manner, right?
[Guest]: And we will think of governments doing the big things that it is supposed to do.
[Guest]: So when governments spend on public goods or any of the market failures, then we can
[Guest]: justify that the benefits probably would be more than 3x the cost that government has
[Guest]: imposed on society.
[Guest]: But otherwise, it doesn't make sense, you know.
[Guest]: So that to me is another learning that we need to keep in mind.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And this is really hard to get through to people because in India, it's almost I keep
[Amit Varma]: saying our biggest religion is not even Hinduism, it's a religion of government, where anything
[Amit Varma]: goes wrong, you want to fix anything in society, you say government karegi as if money falls
[Amit Varma]: from the skies.
[Amit Varma]: The point is money has a cost.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're saying that, oh, for national pride, we need to, you know, have a giant
[Amit Varma]: Sardar Patel statue, or we need to fund a space program or whatever it is.
[Amit Varma]: And we say that no, all this, you know, this is the money that should be spent, we assume
[Amit Varma]: that it has no cost, but the cost it has, is actually much more than what is actually
[Amit Varma]: being spent, like you pointed out, if it's 5000 crores, you know, the cost to society
[Amit Varma]: is 15,000 crores, Shah and Kelkar have a great explanation of this in their book and in their
[Amit Varma]: episode with me, both of which I'll link from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing to remember is something that's probably summed up by an old column of mine,
[Amit Varma]: where the headline was every act of government is an act of violence.
[Amit Varma]: And we don't realize that, you know, what does a government need to exist, it needs
[Amit Varma]: taxes, those taxes are taken essentially through this threat of coercion.
[Amit Varma]: If taxes were not compulsory, if we were not going to get arrested, nobody would pay taxes.
[Amit Varma]: Now it is not to say that there should be no taxes, it is just to say that we should
[Amit Varma]: therefore be careful that not only is there an actual monetary cost to our spending where
[Amit Varma]: 5 rupees is equal to 15 rupees or whatever, not only is that there's also a moral cost,
[Amit Varma]: it involves coercion and everyone in India pays taxes, income tax may be a small percentage,
[Amit Varma]: but even someone begging on the street who is later buying salt or buying soap or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: they are effectively paying taxes because everything is taxed.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore the point is you are committing violence on the poorest of the poor also for
[Amit Varma]: every act of government spending.
[Amit Varma]: So it's important that whenever there is government spending, you need to be able to justify it
[Amit Varma]: and talk about whether it is actually worth it or whether this is not something that we
[Amit Varma]: should do.
[Amit Varma]: And moving on from that, because I wanted to talk about the Indian state next and this
[Amit Varma]: seems a natural segue.
[Amit Varma]: One thing that I think both of us would agree on is that there's no easy answer in terms
[Amit Varma]: of the government is either spending too little or too much because I think both of us would
[Amit Varma]: agree that in areas where the government has a legitimate function, like the rule of law,
[Amit Varma]: like certain public goods or whatever, it does not do enough, it is basically absent.
[Amit Varma]: But in areas where it has no business interfering, it has a massive superstructure, which is
[Amit Varma]: a massive waste of money and also constrains society in various different ways.
[Amit Varma]: How should we think about the state like before we get interested in these subjects of political
[Amit Varma]: philosophy and economics and all that, we think of the state, especially in India as
[Amit Varma]: oh my bab hai, you know, their job is to look after us and we will vote once in five years
[Amit Varma]: and then my bab will take care of everything.
[Amit Varma]: But conceptually, how did you begin to sort of fashion your thinking about the state?
[Amit Varma]: And also, how did you arrive at societism, which is going to ask you about that next,
[Amit Varma]: because when I was editing Pragati, the policy magazine, you'd written a famous, almost iconic,
[Amit Varma]: and seminal essay for me called A Case for Societism, which argued that when it comes
[Amit Varma]: to the state markets and society, we spend too much time thinking about the state and
[Amit Varma]: markets and actually society can solve many of our problems.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to ask you to elaborate on that.
[Amit Varma]: But I guess before we elaborate on that, it's useful to talk about how do we conceive of
[Amit Varma]: a state?
[Amit Varma]: How do we conceive of its relationship with society?
[Amit Varma]: And in contrast with whatever that ideal conception would be, what are things in India actually
[Guest]: like?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So let's begin with India itself, right?
[Guest]: Because there are lots of theories about the state and a lot of people have written books
[Guest]: on great books on it.
[Guest]: But let's begin with the Indian state itself and I would ask you a question.
[Guest]: Why do you think that's the case?
[Guest]: Like if you think that we rely on the state a lot, what are your sort of speculation about
[Guest]: it?
[Amit Varma]: Why is it so in India?
[Amit Varma]: I think one reason is that we need to think about where our conception of the state came
[Amit Varma]: from, like through the independent struggle.
[Amit Varma]: The notion really was that it is a British who are evil.
[Amit Varma]: It is colonialism, which is evil.
[Amit Varma]: And we didn't drill one layer down.
[Amit Varma]: And I would have drilled a layer down and said, okay, the British are evil, colonialism
[Amit Varma]: is bad.
[Amit Varma]: Why?
[Amit Varma]: Let's go a little further.
[Amit Varma]: And the core answer to me lies in coercion, lies in not respecting individual rights,
[Amit Varma]: lies in a top-down vision of society.
[Amit Varma]: Like what was the state in the conception of the British?
[Amit Varma]: It was something to keep the natives under control.
[Amit Varma]: That's basically what it was.
[Amit Varma]: The entire IPC, the Indian Penal Code, most of which we still have on our books, came
[Amit Varma]: from the British.
[Amit Varma]: We still have many of those laws against free speech, for example, 295A, 153A.
[Amit Varma]: All of those are still with us because what happened at independence was that there was
[Amit Varma]: this massive sense of relief that the British are gone.
[Amit Varma]: And partly it wasn't even that our freedom struggle really succeeded.
[Amit Varma]: They were just bankrupt after the war and exhausted and whatever, but the British left.
[Amit Varma]: And when they left, we took over the same state apparatus.
[Amit Varma]: Even when we sat down to design the constitution, you know, there was a comment in the Constituent
[Amit Varma]: Assembly when someone said that, hey, you know, we are designing the state from the
[Amit Varma]: point of view of a policeman.
[Amit Varma]: And that's exactly what we did.
[Amit Varma]: We kept the colonial apparatus, we kept the state, we kept the Indian Penal Code, and
[Amit Varma]: we kept the mindset.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the British had that extremely racist mindset that, oh, these natives know nothing.
[Amit Varma]: We have to civilize them and we have to teach some of them English so they can be our local
[Amit Varma]: officers and all that, the whole Macaulay way of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And somehow we kept that entire apparatus and we brought that thinking when we became
[Amit Varma]: independent.
[Amit Varma]: And also power corrupts, right?
[Amit Varma]: Power always corrupts.
[Amit Varma]: So whatever ideals these people might have, when out of power, when in power, they kind
[Amit Varma]: of continued, you know, all the mechanics of subjugating the people remained.
[Amit Varma]: And a classic illustration of this actually comes in an episode I did with Tripur Dhaman
[Amit Varma]: Singh, who wrote a great book on the First Amendment.
[Amit Varma]: And what happened there was that one of these laws in the IPC, the Sedition Law, was actually
[Amit Varma]: taken before the courts in 1950, where the argument before the courts was that this is
[Amit Varma]: against Article 19, which guarantees us free speech, and the court struck it down.
[Amit Varma]: So the Sedition Law was struck down in 1950.
[Amit Varma]: And then Nehru brought it back with the First Amendment, because he wanted to use it against
[Amit Varma]: political enemies of his and people who were criticizing him, right?
[Amit Varma]: And of course, Nehru did, I won't say everything is Nehru's fault, he did a lot of great things,
[Amit Varma]: but he was also very anti-liberal in certain ways.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the person who argued against this First Amendment and against the law of sedition
[Amit Varma]: being brought back was Shyama Prasad Mukherjee.
[Amit Varma]: So people contain multitudes, and you can't look at them in simplistic ways.
[Amit Varma]: But what we basically did was we took that Maibab mindset.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, even when designing the Constitution, I have an episode with the historian Gyan
[Amit Varma]: Prakash, where Gyan Prakash wrote a book on the emergency.
[Amit Varma]: And his whole point was the emergency was not an aberration.
[Amit Varma]: It was not the case of a truly venal and vile mother and son pair and Indira Gandhi and
[Amit Varma]: Sanjay Gandhi gone mad.
[Amit Varma]: It was designed within the Constitution because the Constitution centralized power and made
[Amit Varma]: it possible for Indira to do what she did.
[Amit Varma]: And why did they centralize power?
[Amit Varma]: Because at the time the Constitution was being debated and written, there were riots all
[Amit Varma]: across the country.
[Amit Varma]: There was no certainty that the center would hold as it were.
[Amit Varma]: There was no certainty that the map of India would look anything like it does now.
[Amit Varma]: So that urge to centralize power is understandable.
[Amit Varma]: But what we ended up with was power that is too centralized and power always corrupts.
[Amit Varma]: And this mindset then went to the people now, again, to continue the other sort of aspect
[Amit Varma]: which you have also written about and commented upon is that the other aspect was that all
[Amit Varma]: of these great freedom fighters recognized that there were many social ills that had
[Amit Varma]: to be sorted out.
[Amit Varma]: And people like Gandhi and to a large extent Ambedkar said that these can come out of that
[Amit Varma]: society can solve these problems.
[Amit Varma]: But there was also a strain of top-down thinking which said that, no, let's design a constitution
[Amit Varma]: which makes sure that the state solves these social problems, a transformative constitution
[Amit Varma]: as it were in Gautam Bhatia's words, he's written a book on it.
[Amit Varma]: And many people support this mission.
[Amit Varma]: I think it was a very flawed mission because you cannot solve these problems from the top
[Amit Varma]: down.
[Amit Varma]: In that one sense, Gandhi and Ambedkar were right.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, Ambedkar said that the Constitution was just like a top soil and therefore implying
[Amit Varma]: that it is extremely superficial, that society is not like that.
[Amit Varma]: And this leads to another problem that the Constitution, while I find that it is not
[Amit Varma]: liberal enough for me in terms of protecting individual rights and so on, was probably
[Amit Varma]: way too liberal for the society itself, which isn't illiberal and was imposed on that society.
[Amit Varma]: And what we are seeing in the current time was actually inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: It just took a few decades to get here, but society has caught up and everyone who cared
[Amit Varma]: for those values failed in that essential mission of propagating them through society.
[Amit Varma]: So that's my kind of long answer, half of what I said about the state and whatever is
[Amit Varma]: not even relevant to what you asked.
[Amit Varma]: But the first half of why we are in this state is that it goes down to the design of the
[Amit Varma]: Indian state at the time of independence.
[Amit Varma]: And then that percolates through the culture.
[Amit Varma]: Because then if all the power is concentrated in the state and markets aren't allowed to
[Amit Varma]: function as they weren't for decades, and in some areas still aren't, like in agriculture,
[Amit Varma]: then what are you going to do if you want to get ahead?
[Amit Varma]: You will want to be part of the state, you'll want to be part of the rent-seeking apparatus,
[Amit Varma]: instead of focusing your energies onto making a profit the good way, which is to make other
[Amit Varma]: people's lives better off.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the dependence on the state grows, the mindset kind of gets worse and
[Amit Varma]: worse.
[Guest]: And that's my broad take on it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I'll come at it from a slightly different angle, because one thing it doesn't explain
[Guest]: is that if British state was so extractive, it should have inspired a complete distrust
[Guest]: of the state, right?
[Guest]: When we were sort of moving on from that, we should have hated that state so viscerally
[Guest]: that we would have wanted an anti-state, right?
[Guest]: Something like what Gandhi was probably advocating.
[Guest]: But yet, that didn't happen, right?
[Guest]: So why is that the case?
[Guest]: And I'm completely speculating here, I have no data on this, but the way I think of this
[Guest]: is, think of the three institutions, state, market and society, either of all three of
[Guest]: these can cause some change, bring good things, bring bad things, whatever, all have complementary
[Guest]: strengths, all have complementary and weaknesses as well.
[Guest]: So at that point of time, when we are talking about the fact that India is independent and
[Guest]: all that, at that point of time, markets were discredited.
[Guest]: Because you had this idea of markets being very closely linked with British colonialism
[Guest]: and exploitation.
[Guest]: So the fact that markets can bring things for us, can make our lives better, was completely
[Guest]: discredited and still continuing to be discredited, right?
[Guest]: So we still want to overcome some of those things.
[Guest]: So if you think of these three elements, one element sort of got discredited.
[Guest]: Now think of the second change maker, which could have probably been the society as well,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And the Indian society has always been, the communities have been strong, right?
[Guest]: The ties have been strong.
[Guest]: The state has always played a small role until that point of time, until this welfare state
[Guest]: becomes a popular ideology across the world.
[Guest]: But there again, this idea came about of the social revolution, right, and what you already
[Guest]: mentioned.
[Guest]: And the social revolution sort of says that the constitution is not just meant to bring
[Guest]: a political and an economic revolution, it will also transform society, right?
[Guest]: And that was a very big challenge that the state took on to itself.
[Guest]: Now, I think that trade-off was very well made.
[Guest]: And I would disagree with you that that trade-off was not worth it, because we've seen a lot
[Guest]: of benefits that have happened because of this, right?
[Guest]: Just this idea of at least this, at that point of time, the caste inequities that were there,
[Guest]: the gender inequities were there.
[Guest]: We are definitely way better than we were at that point of time, right?
[Guest]: And so that trade-off did have a lot of benefits.
[Guest]: But one sort of unintended effect of that was, yes, that people thought that state is
[Guest]: the ultimate arbiter of all these things, right?
[Guest]: Society can never cause this change.
[Guest]: It is the state whose responsibility is to bring all these changes.
[Guest]: So, the idea again is, and you will see all this in our popular imagination as well, that
[Guest]: I pay taxes.
[Guest]: So, now it's the job of the government to do X, Y, Z, right?
[Guest]: Why the hell am I paying them taxes?
[Guest]: But that's not how any society does, right?
[Guest]: You actually don't want the state to do some of the things.
[Guest]: And you want probably the markets or societies to resolve some things on themselves.
[Guest]: So, I think that's sort of the way I look at it, that because of one, markets getting
[Guest]: discredited and second, the idea of social revolution, meaning that state should solve
[Guest]: things and society can't, we are left with only one player in the game, and that is the
[Guest]: state.
[Guest]: And one direct consequence of this is what you said, and I call it the omni-absent state,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So, the idea is that it is present where you don't want it to be and absent where absolutely
[Guest]: you want it to be.
[Guest]: So, there's a paradox which comes because of this, there's a paradox between ambition
[Guest]: and competence, right?
[Guest]: So, ambition of the state is to move the world, change the world, but it does not have competence
[Guest]: on many of these grounds, right?
[Guest]: And in fact, competence of the state has reduced over time, right?
[Guest]: Remember, earlier there were Navaratnas, right?
[Guest]: The best in the world wanted to be in the state.
[Guest]: Even after independence, when the state was the only player in the town, the best people
[Guest]: would go to the state.
[Guest]: But as economy liberalized, people had better options, so the competency of the state decreased.
[Guest]: So paradoxically, with economic growth, you had this governance gap increasing, right?
[Guest]: So you had people, the government still being in 19th century and society and markets moving
[Guest]: to the 21st century.
[Guest]: So, you have a state which has very little competence, but you also have a state which
[Guest]: has ambition to do a lot of things and that ambition has popular legitimacy.
[Guest]: Lot of us think that the state should do this, markets are not good, society is not good
[Guest]: and that is, I think, the reason why we perceive the state the way we do.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of observations.
[Amit Varma]: One is, I love that phrase, the omni-absent state and I completely agree with you on the
[Amit Varma]: Indian state being absent everywhere where it should be present and vice versa.
[Amit Varma]: What I'd say, what I've seen over the last few decades is that Indian society has by
[Amit Varma]: and large in a Jugaadu way solved its own problems.
[Amit Varma]: So most of the progress that has actually happened within society is society just solving
[Amit Varma]: its own problems despite of the state.
[Amit Varma]: The fact is, there is no rule of law in most of the country, there's an illusion of it.
[Amit Varma]: You have police stations and policemen in uniforms, but there is no rule of law, but
[Amit Varma]: society has kind of gotten along.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, I'd say that whatever little progress and I would say it's too little, whatever
[Amit Varma]: little progress we've made on issues like gender and caste has again come from within
[Amit Varma]: society.
[Amit Varma]: I think the job of the state really was to protect the rights of every individual regardless
[Amit Varma]: of gender and caste, and it has firstly not managed to do that at all.
[Amit Varma]: Secondly, there is a lot of progress yet to be made.
[Amit Varma]: Thirdly, you know, one could argue that the way the state approached it has actually solidified
[Amit Varma]: a lot of the toxic identity politics that goes on across the country and that Indian
[Amit Varma]: politics has been plagued with, you know, and in a sense, of course, a lot of those
[Amit Varma]: identities have started getting subsumed within the larger identity of Hindutva that the BJP
[Amit Varma]: are building up.
[Amit Varma]: But even there, all the considerations of, say, Amit Shah while planning the 2014 elections
[Amit Varma]: were on the basis of caste, where he said that, okay, you know, people say we won't
[Amit Varma]: get the OBC vote in UP, but actually it's the Yadavs we won't get.
[Amit Varma]: We'll go after the non-Yadav OBCs who resent the Yadavs.
[Amit Varma]: We'll go after the non-Jatav Dalits who resent the Jatavs.
[Amit Varma]: In Maharashtra, the non-Maratha OBCs very much premised on caste.
[Amit Varma]: And I would argue that a lot of those problems we haven't solved and to the extent that it
[Amit Varma]: is better, it is really better because of social attitudes and tendencies like urbanization,
[Amit Varma]: which is not to say that caste is not a problem in the cities, it's a problem everywhere in
[Amit Varma]: India, but it's less in the cities because wider economic networks and self-interest
[Amit Varma]: and all those things come into play.
[Amit Varma]: Nothing to sort of do with the state.
[Amit Varma]: Now, before we kind of move on, and I, by the way, did some interesting episodes with
[Amit Varma]: Ashwin Mahesh also, and I think in the first of them, he spoke about how the problem in
[Amit Varma]: the early decades of India was that the balance between the state and society was too much
[Amit Varma]: on the side of the state and we needed to bring it more to the social side.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm at a definitional level going to argue with the conventional view that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you have stated, Agoram Rajan has stated, of there being these three prongs, which are
[Amit Varma]: the state, society and markets.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, if we look at markets as a marketplaces where goods and services are exchanged, yeah,
[Amit Varma]: you can look at it as something separate.
[Amit Varma]: But I think of markets really as a web of voluntary action, you know, involving members
[Amit Varma]: of society, and therefore a mechanism through which society expresses itself.
[Amit Varma]: And often the state tries to control this mechanism to subvert this mechanism to use
[Amit Varma]: its power to, you know, do cronyism and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But I look at it as a sort of this web of voluntary action.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, I would say that even you and I, right, no money has exchanged hands between
[Amit Varma]: you and I being on this podcast together now, but we are doing it for mutual benefit of
[Amit Varma]: different kinds of goodwill between us and you know, I'm sure we'll both enjoy this conversation
[Amit Varma]: and blah, blah, blah variety of reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd view that as a market transaction, even though there's no money shifting hands.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, rather than pigeonhole markets into one particular category, ki marketplace
[Amit Varma]: mein stall hai, mai paisa dera ho, shawl lera ho, that is a market, no, I think I'd include
[Amit Varma]: it as one form of voluntary interaction and where it is not voluntary, I wouldn't call
[Amit Varma]: it a market in sort of the true sense, therefore.
[Amit Varma]: So clearly, you don't agree and you think that it's a separate prong, which is a conventional
[Amit Varma]: view.
[Amit Varma]: So I realized that I'm saying something that might seem that is a very different way of
[Amit Varma]: looking at things.
[Amit Varma]: So what's kind of your response?
[Guest]: Yeah, a couple of things, one, for example, and I've heard your episodes before where
[Guest]: you were differentiating with state, the defining criteria of state being that it is a coercive
[Guest]: entity, right?
[Guest]: And the markets aren't, but look at it from another way that state alone isn't coercive,
[Guest]: you know, like, for example, societies can also be coercive, you know, and markets probably
[Guest]: aren't if they are working in a voluntary manner.
[Guest]: So for example,
[Amit Varma]: No, to clarify that, I think what I would have meant is that the state has a monopoly
[Amit Varma]: on violence.
[Amit Varma]: Now, other people can be violent, but I'm only willing to accept that the coercion of
[Amit Varma]: the state is justified.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, that's a liberal paradox that to protect our rights, you need the state
[Amit Varma]: to exist and the existence of the state means some rights are gone.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, I would say that coercion everywhere else, whether in markets or society,
[Amit Varma]: coercion is bad period, you know, and even within the state, I would say you need to
[Amit Varma]: accept that coercion is bad, but you need to accept that some coercion is necessary,
[Amit Varma]: because you need some coercion for there to be policemen and for there to be the rule
[Guest]: of law and so on.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So here we enter a paradox, right?
[Guest]: Like you were mentioning in the beginning that society should have sorted out things
[Guest]: for itself, and the state shouldn't get into a lot of things.
[Guest]: But how does society sort out things?
[Guest]: Society will use coercion as one of the instruments, right?
[Guest]: And that will be there.
[Guest]: It might actually be beneficial also in some way, you know, maybe it will align people's
[Guest]: interests to a particular goal, otherwise, everyone will be dispersed, etc.
[Guest]: So I think there is, even if society would be the way you wanted it, it would have used
[Guest]: coercion as one of the means, probably for good benefits, mostly for outcomes that we
[Guest]: don't want, but there will be this element which exists.
[Guest]: So that is sort of my one point.
[Guest]: The second point, I think there is an alternative criteria to look at it, just because thinking
[Guest]: in terms of what are states, markets, society good at, and there is a difference in all
[Guest]: three, as I see it, you know.
[Guest]: So if you look at, place individual at the center, and you look at these three ends of
[Guest]: a triangle, what does the state provide to the individual?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, human rights, which you said, human rights can't exist without a state,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Yeah, we have human rights, but who will enforce them?
[Guest]: In the state of nature, what are our human rights, right?
[Guest]: So you need a state which enforces the human rights that I have, right?
[Guest]: So that is the goal of the state, to provide security, justice, etc., right?
[Guest]: The market to the individual will provide an outlet for creativity, and the most important
[Guest]: thing choice, right?
[Guest]: That is really fundamental, and that is what it provides.
[Guest]: And there is one more thing that you would need, right, like we've discussed about how
[Guest]: individuals are essentially tribal by nature, for good, bad reasons, both, right?
[Guest]: But that is the way we are constructed.
[Guest]: So in a sense, we need this third element, which provides a sense of identity, values,
[Guest]: norms, etc., right?
[Guest]: And that, I think, is what the third element provides, which is society, okay?
[Guest]: Now, you can think of markets and societies on a continuum, and I agree, you know, most
[Guest]: people who say markets and society is different, they also agree that it is on a continuum.
[Guest]: But the way this operates is different, right?
[Guest]: In markets, you benefit precisely because you are in a web of these relationships, and
[Guest]: you don't care about knowing who has supplied this microphone to you, right?
[Guest]: We all benefit because there's a web of sort of transactions which are formed, and all
[Guest]: of us benefit.
[Guest]: So that's great.
[Guest]: You don't get any sense of belonging, identity, with that person who's selling this to you,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You only know that yes, all of us gain with it.
[Guest]: But when you look at the society, probably it is at the other end of the spectrum, where
[Guest]: you have this sense, you build a relationship with people, you try to think of what are
[Guest]: the values that are there, what are the norms that are there, and things like that, right?
[Guest]: So those are at the other end of the same continuum of market and society.
[Guest]: So I would say that there is a difference between market and society in this way.
[Guest]: One more thing, I talked about how functionally they are different.
[Guest]: Even the way they fail and they succeed are different, you know, markets, societies and
[Guest]: societies, right?
[Guest]: So for example, when we talk about market failures, what is a market failure?
[Guest]: Essentially, we are saying when an efficient allocation of scarce resource doesn't happen,
[Guest]: that's when you say markets have failed, right?
[Guest]: So that is an example of a market failure.
[Guest]: Similarly, you know what government failure is.
[Guest]: But where would you put, for example, caste discrimination, right?
[Guest]: It's probably not so much the mistake of the government also, they have tried various things
[Guest]: that they could, not a market failure also, but I think it's a social failure, right?
[Guest]: Like, we as a society itself have not been able to overcome it the way we would have
[Guest]: wanted to, you know, similarly, religious majoritarianism, is it a market failure?
[Guest]: Is it a government failure?
[Guest]: Probably I would say it's a third category, the way our values, norms have emerged, have
[Guest]: led us on this path, you know.
[Guest]: So that's why I would classify it as a third kind of category, which is society.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, very wise words.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess one way, and I'm just thinking a lot of thinking about this is of society
[Amit Varma]: as a kind of superstructure.
[Amit Varma]: And you have these webs of voluntary actions and a certain class of those form markets.
[Amit Varma]: But you also need order in the society for which at some point, you need a state and
[Amit Varma]: then a state emerges and that is a state.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, then the state just takes over and power corrupts and all of that and the
[Amit Varma]: state starts interfering in markets also and all of that happens.
[Amit Varma]: And the term you've used for society kind of solving its own problems is societism.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to sort of look at this in a couple of contexts, which you know, you've also spoken
[Amit Varma]: about you gave a great talk at Manthan, which is run by my friend Ajay Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: So I linked to that as well on YouTube.
[Amit Varma]: And let's look at a couple of these contexts, the context which you bring up, for example,
[Amit Varma]: is that smaller languages are dying out, because everybody for rational reasons is drawn to
[Amit Varma]: bigger languages like English or like Hindi or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And that's hurting language diversity.
[Amit Varma]: You know, last week, I did an episode with Peggy Mohan on language is fantastic episode.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, in the sense that I'm not praising my own show, I'm just saying that she's written
[Amit Varma]: an incredible book and was so insightful.
[Amit Varma]: And she points to this also.
[Amit Varma]: And I brought up the question of, say, the cavendish banana, which the great food writer
[Amit Varma]: Vikram doctor had once told me about that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, which just held it up.
[Amit Varma]: I'll take a screenshot.
[Amit Varma]: Hold it up again.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so screenshot of Cavendish banana.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing with the Cavendish banana is that I think we exported it to begin with.
[Amit Varma]: And then it became popular in America.
[Amit Varma]: And then economies of scale happened and it became the dominant banana as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And then it came back to India and the economies of scale continued along with something Peggy
[Amit Varma]: pointed out that it lasts better than other bananas.
[Amit Varma]: And now all our hundreds of varieties of indigenous bananas are dying out.
[Amit Varma]: And Cavendish is taking over because everybody is making voluntary and rational choices.
[Amit Varma]: One example.
[Amit Varma]: Now, we can all agree diversity is good.
[Amit Varma]: But as an individual, you know, you just went out and bought the Cavendish banana and we
[Amit Varma]: are both speaking in English.
[Amit Varma]: So what are we talking about?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, how do we solve this?
[Amit Varma]: A similar problem is big tech, like I constantly feel that when we talk about the polarization
[Amit Varma]: that happens online, and so on and so forth, I think it is horrible.
[Amit Varma]: So much of social media is just made our discourse toxic, but I don't want the state to step
[Amit Varma]: in because of the state steps in and hey, power corrupts, depending on the person who
[Amit Varma]: is in charge.
[Amit Varma]: It'll just lead to free speech dying, dissent dying, I don't want the state to have too
[Amit Varma]: much power here.
[Amit Varma]: I've always said it's a social problem.
[Amit Varma]: We got to figure out how to sort it out.
[Amit Varma]: Other problems that you point out is the context of for example, ghettoization in cities, where
[Amit Varma]: Hindu landlords will say we won't give our apartments on rent to meat eaters and therefore
[Amit Varma]: Muslims and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, from the rational choices of individuals, which as individuals, they have a right to
[Amit Varma]: make you have this ghettoization where Muslims live in certain areas, Hindus live in other
[Amit Varma]: areas, and the social outcome is terrible.
[Amit Varma]: But at an individual level, everyone is making a choice that they have a right to make.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if you know, somebody says it's my house, I'll give it to whoever I want.
[Amit Varma]: That's fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: You want to protect his individual rights also, but what do you do about the larger
[Amit Varma]: social problem?
[Amit Varma]: Now, the way I think about all these social problems is that hey, these are problems that
[Amit Varma]: society has to solve, the state cannot solve everything.
[Amit Varma]: The state can step in when individual rights are abrogated.
[Amit Varma]: So when there is something like Sati and a woman is being killed, the state has to step
[Amit Varma]: in.
[Amit Varma]: You know, that's the job of the state.
[Amit Varma]: When you know, people are enslaved in different ways or a Khab panchayat says that honor killing
[Amit Varma]: karo, the state has to step in because individual rights are hurt by that.
[Amit Varma]: But in all of these cases, that a kid says that I don't want my child to learn Awadhi,
[Amit Varma]: which is what I speak.
[Amit Varma]: I want my child to get ahead in the world and there's an opportunity cost for learning
[Amit Varma]: Awadhi, which is that they won't know English and Hindi so well.
[Amit Varma]: So I want them to get ahead in the world.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a rational choice.
[Amit Varma]: You can't argue with this.
[Amit Varma]: So through the frame of societism, what insight can you give on these problems?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think my priors are similar to yours, Amit that I would say, because there are opportunity
[Guest]: costs to state action, you would want the state to do things which are in the range
[Guest]: of market failures, address them, and things like that.
[Guest]: So you wouldn't want the government to do all these things, even though both of us agree
[Guest]: that they are not desirable, right?
[Guest]: And they are, they should be overcome.
[Guest]: But the idea is whose job is it right, the one, the default action, because we discussed
[Guest]: about our part dependence, we lot of people will say it's the state's job, right?
[Guest]: And a small minority will say probably, you should solve it by doing probably property
[Guest]: rights and solving it through markets.
[Guest]: But the idea is that even I don't think both of them can solve this particular issue.
[Guest]: And maybe you will need a third element.
[Guest]: And that's what my essay was about that we often think of society as this patient on
[Guest]: which two people are operating the state and the market.
[Guest]: And this society is just lying there being operated on.
[Guest]: But think of it in another way, society itself is a partner, you know, society can bring
[Guest]: about a lot of changes, it can self correct, it has self corrected.
[Guest]: So that's why think of it as all these three being partners and not as one being a patient
[Guest]: being operated on the other.
[Guest]: So that's where sort of I begin.
[Guest]: And I said that, for example, all three have their own comparative strengths and weaknesses.
[Guest]: And I'll give three examples where societies can actually self correct it.
[Guest]: And I'll start with Eleanor Ostrom's work, right?
[Guest]: I mean, governing the commons, very fundamental book that I think a lot of people should read.
[Guest]: And she addressed the same question, she looked at there was this idea of tragedy of the commons,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: The idea that common resources will get over exploited.
[Guest]: And the only way to overcome that is either through state restricting what people have
[Guest]: access to, or market.
[Guest]: So basically, you have private property rights being defined, you have fences, you have clear
[Guest]: demarcation of who owns what and things like that.
[Guest]: Now, she says there is another way to look at this.
[Guest]: And they have documented studies of common resources, I think, close to 600, 700 or more
[Guest]: studies where people manage this, neither by the state solution or by the market solution,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And that was where sort of civil societies came in.
[Guest]: So they found out that one, the context was very important, the solution couldn't be generalized.
[Guest]: So what worked in one country didn't work in just another part of the country.
[Guest]: But broadly, they tried to derive some lessons.
[Guest]: And there were three or four principles that the study concludes, right?
[Guest]: Whenever there is graduated sanctions, whenever there is a higher level of trust, whenever,
[Guest]: you know, there was a lot of communication between the entire societal mass, they were
[Guest]: able to forge out solutions.
[Guest]: Some of them were coercive, right, the graduated sanctions are coercive.
[Guest]: And yet, they were able to prevent this so called tragedy of the commons.
[Guest]: So what it says is there is a third way out.
[Guest]: In fact, what it says is market failures can be prevented not just by the state, but by
[Guest]: society as well.
[Guest]: You know, often, even in the most liberal tradition, we think that government should
[Guest]: come in when there is a market failure.
[Guest]: I would say even a more liberal proposition that even when there's a market failure, maybe
[Guest]: wait, you know, maybe the society can solve it.
[Guest]: And then even if society can't, then the state should come in, you know, so that is one way
[Guest]: to think of it.
[Guest]: So this is one example, right.
[Guest]: So there are examples of common resources, which can be managed by local communities.
[Guest]: So a lot of work needs to be done.
[Guest]: I haven't done it.
[Guest]: But things like maybe what engenders trust, we need to understand, right?
[Guest]: What builds social capital?
[Guest]: What builds bridging capital more than bonding capital, right?
[Guest]: Those are questions that we need to investigate.
[Guest]: But we don't because we think society is a useless thing, which has all its problems,
[Guest]: which the great state or markets can solve.
[Guest]: That's one kind of thing, right?
[Guest]: Second one is just philanthropy.
[Guest]: I would also classify as one way that civil society sort of corrects problems in societies,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: And I think it is very important in a state like India, for these initiatives, because
[Guest]: our state for the foreseeable future will never have the resources to do all the things
[Guest]: that we wanted, right.
[Guest]: And the example I always talk about is public libraries, for example, we want them, we all
[Guest]: desire that we should have them.
[Guest]: But can you think of a state which is having so many challenges, developmental challenges
[Guest]: to invest in, say, art or culture or libraries the way you want it?
[Guest]: It won't, right?
[Guest]: It's, in fact, immoral of us to expect of the state to do it because it needs to do
[Guest]: more fundamental things.
[Guest]: So who will solve it, right?
[Guest]: So maybe I would again look at it as some things that civil society can solve for it.
[Guest]: But we've again had this major problem where civil society initiatives end up substituting
[Guest]: the state rather than complementing it, right.
[Guest]: So the example that I gave is an example of complementing.
[Guest]: The state does what it can, all the other things maybe the society solves for it.
[Guest]: But when you have things like corporate social responsibility, or the state saying that,
[Guest]: you know, you should do the schools because we have problems constructing schools, so
[Guest]: now you pitch in, right, that's where the state is using coercion to paper over its
[Guest]: own failures.
[Guest]: And it is getting the society to do its dirty work, right, the things that it should have
[Guest]: done it hasn't.
[Guest]: So it brings in the civil society and channels all its resources to fix the failures of the
[Guest]: state.
[Guest]: And that's what I call when I say substituting the state.
[Guest]: And you don't want it, right?
[Guest]: So again, you want state to focus on things it does and you get the civil society to pitch
[Guest]: in in things which the state won't do for a foreseeable future.
[Guest]: The third example is just about social movements, right?
[Guest]: We have seen how civil society initiatives by individuals, by communities have made the
[Guest]: world better off, right?
[Guest]: So we know of examples where people come together to solve problems for themselves.
[Guest]: So I mean, there are many examples won't go into great detail.
[Guest]: But these are just three illustrative cases where we can see civil society coming together
[Guest]: to solve its own problems and that's why I say that we need to investigate why this happens,
[Guest]: in which conditions this happens.
[Guest]: Can we do something so that social capital is built instead of thinking only in state
[Guest]: and market dichotomy?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, four points I want to make here as you see while you're speaking because I don't
[Amit Varma]: like to interrupt, I take copious notes.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore four points I cannot come up with one is just for my listeners that people
[Amit Varma]: keep saying market failure, market failure.
[Amit Varma]: The first thing that you know, reading public choice theory teaches you and I had an episode
[Amit Varma]: on that where I was in fact, interviewed by a former colleague, Pawan Srinath on public
[Amit Varma]: choice theory.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link that from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And the first thing it teaches you is that government failure is ubiquitous, nobody talks
[Amit Varma]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody says that, oh, there has been that market failure, which is an outlier to begin
[Amit Varma]: with.
[Amit Varma]: And then they'll say government will step in and they're comparing the ideal government
[Amit Varma]: action with the actual thing that went wrong in the outlier example from the marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: Well, actually, you should compare actual versus actual and government failure is ubiquitous
[Amit Varma]: because the incentives are wrong, because you're spending somebody else's money on somebody
[Amit Varma]: else.
[Amit Varma]: Unlike in a marketplace, where you are driven by better incentives, and despite that market
[Amit Varma]: failures may happen, but we have to sort of think about it in this context as well.
[Guest]: My second point is that if I just wanted to add to this, in fact, when we teach this failures,
[Guest]: we teach three types of failures, not even two.
[Guest]: So just like how markets can fail, governments can fail.
[Guest]: And we give a lot of examples for that in ways in which governments can fail, right?
[Guest]: So a lot of rent seeking, rent capture, all those are examples of government failures,
[Guest]: we know that.
[Guest]: And the third failure is social failures.
[Guest]: And that's where I told you about, you know, just the fact that if you have a society where
[Guest]: there is much of bonding capital and no bridging capital is an example where society has failed.
[Guest]: So there are three failures, you know, it's not just that markets fail, we think of markets
[Guest]: failing and then that's why government should pitch in, but all three can fail.
[Amit Varma]: All three can fail and all three can fail together in India as sometimes happens.
[Amit Varma]: The second point I wanted to make was about what you say about, you know, social actions,
[Amit Varma]: you know, complementing state action.
[Amit Varma]: That's something that Ashwin Mahesh has spoken about at length with all the episodes I've
[Amit Varma]: done with him.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll link them because he is someone who is in many ways a sort of a social reformer
[Amit Varma]: in terms of just doing so much work to work with government and saying that, hey, you
[Amit Varma]: just can't leave everything to the state and rant against the state on Twitter, you've
[Amit Varma]: got to also move your own butt and as a citizen, work with the state to make things happen.
[Amit Varma]: And I've had arguments with that as well.
[Amit Varma]: But those are fascinating episodes.
[Amit Varma]: And he's got a very interesting point of view.
[Amit Varma]: So do listen to those.
[Amit Varma]: My third point was about, you know, what you pointed out that sometimes, you know, like
[Amit Varma]: CSR, the state will say, okay, I failed.
[Amit Varma]: So you do it, they'll put the onus on the state.
[Amit Varma]: There's something worse than that, which is where the state will say, okay, I'm failing,
[Amit Varma]: but you can't try.
[Amit Varma]: I won't let you try.
[Amit Varma]: And a classic example of this is education, where, you know, running a for profit school
[Amit Varma]: in India is illegal, it has been illegal for decades.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, there have been studies over the last couple of decades, which have shown
[Amit Varma]: that the poorest of poor parents would rather send their kid to a budget private school,
[Amit Varma]: which is a really low cost private school, rather than a free government school, because
[Amit Varma]: of free government schools are just so bad.
[Amit Varma]: And no one is saying shut down government schools or the government shouldn't do education,
[Amit Varma]: but it doesn't even want choice to be available to parents so that they can choose.
[Amit Varma]: And in this way, they're not only not solving a problem of education, they're not even letting
[Amit Varma]: society solve it, you know, and it's not an either or it's not that the government should
[Amit Varma]: stop completely.
[Amit Varma]: People like me would always say that, you know, education is important, let the government
[Amit Varma]: do whatever it's doing, but allow private people to actually function, which it doesn't.
[Amit Varma]: I've had great episodes on this with Amit Chandra and Karthik Muralidharan, I'll link
[Amit Varma]: those from the show notes as well.
[Amit Varma]: And this is also true of vaccines, it's a point Ajay Shah made that not only did the
[Amit Varma]: government not procure any vaccines, it didn't even allow private parties to enter into arrangements
[Amit Varma]: to do so.
[Amit Varma]: When Pfizer wanted to enter India in the later months of last year, it told them to get lost,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and then you have this and that's basically murder.
[Amit Varma]: At that point in time for the government to tell Pfizer to get lost is equal to murder,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and again, something we've discussed at length in the episode on vaccination.
[Amit Varma]: So that's, you know, it's not even that the state doesn't do it, and then it passes that
[Amit Varma]: responsibility on.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes it doesn't do it, and it won't let you do it, which is even worse.
[Amit Varma]: And what is the fourth point I was going to make?
[Amit Varma]: Okay, my fourth point is a scribble.
[Amit Varma]: I can't read my own handwriting.
[Amit Varma]: If it strikes me later, I'll kind of come back to it.
[Amit Varma]: But do you want to sort of respond to any of these?
[Guest]: And then we'll move ahead.
[Guest]: No, yeah, I agree with your point on just that sometimes the state will even prevent
[Guest]: a solution from emerging and we've seen many examples of that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, my fourth point is this, my fourth point is saying that society will solve its own
[Amit Varma]: problems is assuming that it is inevitable that there will be moral progress as we define
[Amit Varma]: it, right, that there is an arc of history, and it is going towards freedom or justice
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, and that arc of history makes it inevitable that social action will move
[Amit Varma]: in that direction.
[Amit Varma]: But what if that arc of history isn't inevitable?
[Amit Varma]: And what if social action moves in the other direction?
[Amit Varma]: So liberals like you and I will say that khap panchayats are a problem, that coercive action
[Amit Varma]: by them should be banned, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But social action may go in the opposite direction, because you and I are firmly in the minority,
[Amit Varma]: you know, English speaking elites, influenced by the ideas of the Enlightenment and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So that's another key problem with societism that you assume that things will move in a
[Amit Varma]: good direction.
[Amit Varma]: But what if they don't?
[Amit Varma]: What if people get lynched because somebody was seen with a cow?
[Amit Varma]: That is also social action.
[Amit Varma]: And it's horrendous.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So that's why that is an example of social failures, right?
[Guest]: That's why all three can fail, right?
[Guest]: And that's so the idea is you need to guard against that failure.
[Guest]: And that's really tough challenge, right?
[Guest]: So you would want society to actually solve some things and again, not be where you don't
[Guest]: want it to be.
[Guest]: And that is challenging, and no doubt, but that's why you have a balance, right?
[Guest]: You would want state to assert itself whenever any human right violation happens, or whenever
[Guest]: the principles of the republic aren't followed, right?
[Guest]: And that's why you need a strong state on those counts, you don't want a weak state
[Guest]: on those counts, right?
[Guest]: And similarly, you need markets, society will coerce you into saying that you are we all
[Guest]: should be similar.
[Guest]: And that's why I don't do something which is different from us.
[Guest]: But you need market to expressly have choice, you need people to do crazy things and try
[Guest]: their luck in various things.
[Guest]: So that's why it is a balance, which I talked about, it's not about one being a problem
[Guest]: and the other being a solution, all three are problems, all three are solutions.
[Amit Varma]: Marvelous.
[Amit Varma]: So let's move on to the questions now.
[Amit Varma]: And there are some 480 questions on Twitter, well, not so many, but I mean, I haven't counted.
[Amit Varma]: But we'll go through a few of the questions.
[Amit Varma]: And then I'll ask you about the course that you guys are doing at Takshashila and why
[Amit Varma]: everyone should sign up or at least apply for it.
[Amit Varma]: Because I'm sure you have limited seats which are going fast.
[Amit Varma]: And the first question I want to ask since we're talking about societism is from Akshay
[Amit Varma]: Alladi.
[Amit Varma]: And Akshay has a number of questions.
[Amit Varma]: But the first of them is how is societism different from conservatism?
[Guest]: Yeah, I've had debates with Akshay on this.
[Guest]: Yeah, conservative, again, the idea behind conservatism, as I understand it, would be
[Guest]: yes, that society can solve some problems on its own, right.
[Guest]: So in that sense, they are similar, and that sort of maps.
[Guest]: But when I'm talking about societism, I'm also trying to explore what are the things
[Guest]: that markets are good at, what are the things governments are good at, and then trying to
[Guest]: see where that balance rides, right.
[Guest]: So I'm not saying that society is the only solution or society is a better solution compared
[Guest]: to the others.
[Guest]: I'm just trying to look at where are the strengths of each of these.
[Guest]: So I think that is the nuance, which is slightly different from what conservatism would say,
[Guest]: right, that yes, society is the leading actor, and it determines.
[Guest]: So for example, that is why I would still say that the social revolution experiment
[Guest]: was a one that we should have had.
[Guest]: Whereas a conservative idea would say, I mean, the state shouldn't have gotten to this and
[Guest]: society would have solved it for itself, which was, you know, the Gandhian view as well.
[Guest]: But I would say that it is, you need the state to have said that, you know, some things are
[Guest]: not right.
[Guest]: They are violations of human rights and human dignity.
[Guest]: And that's why we won't allow it, even though there is broad acceptance in every quarter
[Guest]: of the society, right.
[Guest]: So that's where I think conservatism and societalism differs.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough, I guess, you know, arrive at a similar solution through very different
[Amit Varma]: frameworks.
[Amit Varma]: So that's kind of one way of looking at it.
[Amit Varma]: I had an episode on Indian conservatism, by the way, with Jerry Rao, who had written a
[Amit Varma]: book on that.
[Amit Varma]: So people who are interested could look that up.
[Amit Varma]: Akshay also asks three other questions, but all are to do with foreign policy and defense.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, Pranay and I decided we won't talk about foreign policy and defense today,
[Amit Varma]: even though he's one of our foremost foreign policy experts, simply because we spent a
[Amit Varma]: whole episode last year talking about that.
[Amit Varma]: So kindly go and listen to that.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link it from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And no doubt he will be on at a future date to talk about that as well.
[Amit Varma]: But today, I thought we'll focus on public policy and some of his broader meta thinking
[Amit Varma]: than what might now be happening in Afghanistan or Kashmir or the theater command imbroglio
[Amit Varma]: as Akshay puts it, which, you know, I don't know what that is.
[Amit Varma]: I'll have to Google it to find out after this.
[Amit Varma]: Question from Sudhir Sarnobat, where he says his Hindi is very good.
[Amit Varma]: Where did he learn that?
[Amit Varma]: Is he from Nagpur or not somewhere?
[Amit Varma]: You already answered this, I guess.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so I'm not from the north.
[Guest]: I mean, I spent seven years, first seven years.
[Guest]: And I speak Marathi and now just Hindi at home.
[Guest]: But I would say that Hindi newspaper reading improved my Hindi a lot.
[Guest]: That's the simple answer to it.
[Guest]: And I've always thought in Hindi, I don't think in English even today.
[Guest]: That's the language which comes to my mind is Hindi, even though it's not my mother tongue.
[Guest]: So I mean, yeah, somehow it's happened.
[Guest]: So I guess it's because of the reading.
[Guest]: You know, once you start getting ideas in a particular medium, probably you start thinking
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: What about you, Amit?
[Guest]: Always in English?
[Amit Varma]: My Hindi?
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in class 10 and class 12, I got more marks in Hindi than in English.
[Amit Varma]: And marks are no indicator, I mean, it tells you how flawed our education system is in
[Amit Varma]: terms of metrics.
[Amit Varma]: And my trick was there what a lot of people do in English, which is I just learned a whole
[Amit Varma]: bunch of Hindi big words and put them together randomly and it kind of worked for me.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, I have unfortunately lost lost touch with the languages.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm not like Hindi, I can read and write Bengali.
[Amit Varma]: My mom was Bengali.
[Amit Varma]: So I grew up speaking Bengali at home.
[Amit Varma]: And Marathi now I can understand after all these years in Pune and then Bombay for 20
[Amit Varma]: plus years.
[Amit Varma]: But it's not as good as I would like it to be.
[Amit Varma]: And I would, I want to, you know, get it back working properly at some point.
[Amit Varma]: And at some point later this year, I want to do things on YouTube and try out different
[Amit Varma]: things and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe you can join me and we can do something in Hindi, let's see.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: Yeah, that would be fun.
[Guest]: Because that's one of my passions.
[Guest]: This this idea that there's so much great content in English, right?
[Guest]: You have the best in the world.
[Guest]: But what about the other languages?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I mean, do we talk about opportunity costs in Hindi?
[Guest]: Have you ever heard of engaging conversation in Hindi on this?
[Guest]: I haven't.
[Guest]: I have listened to a lot of Hindi content, but no, right?
[Guest]: You will either have this really shuddh Hindi, which no one will understand, or it will be,
[Guest]: you won't discuss these at all, right?
[Guest]: So you will only discuss who won the elections or what is happening on in cricket or, you
[Guest]: know, that ABCD of Indian marketing, right?
[Guest]: Astrology, Bollywood, cricket and devotional.
[Guest]: So these were the topics that you discuss.
[Guest]: But who discusses economic reasoning, public policy, maybe some do, but not, I haven't
[Guest]: heard of it.
[Amit Varma]: No, I think everybody everywhere has a great hunger and desire to understand the world.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, we assume that we live in a lucky age where everything is on the internet,
[Amit Varma]: so all knowledge is available to us.
[Amit Varma]: But if you think about it, that's the privilege of being English language speakers, that we
[Amit Varma]: have that available to us.
[Amit Varma]: People in Hindi who, you know, may not know English that well or be comfortable in it,
[Amit Varma]: don't have that world open to them entirely.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, people like you and me who keep talking about how, you know, elites designed
[Amit Varma]: a constitution and it was nothing like society and Gandhi said society should be changed
[Amit Varma]: from within.
[Amit Varma]: Well, you know, we got to practice what we preach and actually speak the language of
[Amit Varma]: society in whatever little way we can.
[Amit Varma]: And otherwise, we are just speaking to fellow elites.
[Amit Varma]: So I completely buy that.
[Amit Varma]: There's another question on your language where Murlal asks, quote, can you ask him
[Amit Varma]: about his accent, please, and where it comes from?
[Amit Varma]: I am a linguist and I've always fought against accentism, but somehow poor Pranay Kutasane's
[Amit Varma]: accent defeated me, sorry.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't understand the question.
[Amit Varma]: Where does your accent come from?
[Amit Varma]: He's asking.
[Guest]: I think you've given enough of an answer of Indore and Goa.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's heavily influenced by Marathi.
[Amit Varma]: And first he was in Indore and then he was in Goa where he was outdoor.
[Unknown]: So that's my dad joke out of the way.
[Amit Varma]: Gurman Bhatia says big fan have been trying to sing where I play puliyabazi while driving
[Amit Varma]: with parents and we pause, discuss the issue at different points.
[Amit Varma]: It's been hard to bring such discourse to them earlier, but they love it.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for creating an accessible and intellectually sound podcast.
[Amit Varma]: And yes, for all of my listeners who might not have noticed, Pranay co-hosts this brilliant
[Amit Varma]: podcast called Puliyabazi in Hindi.
[Amit Varma]: So do kindly check it out.
[Amit Varma]: And she didn't ask a question.
[Amit Varma]: What is this?
[Amit Varma]: I thought there'll be a question at the end of it.
[Amit Varma]: Atish has a question on semiconductor politics and about something called GANFAB.
[Amit Varma]: I'll ignore these specific questions and just speak to broader ones.
[Amit Varma]: Sarsij Narayan asks, how would stagflation in Indian economy look and feel like for a
[Amit Varma]: common man?
[Amit Varma]: And he's also he says he's trying to figure out how far we are from a stagflation.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's more of a macroeconomic thing, right?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, this idea that inflation is inherently something which is bad is, again, a fallacy,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Inflation, any growing economy will have inflation.
[Guest]: Why inflation happens is just because demand is greater than the supply for a particular
[Guest]: product.
[Guest]: Why is the demand greater?
[Guest]: Because people's purchasing power has increased.
[Guest]: So a society where there is no inflation means a society is getting stagnated in terms of
[Guest]: its demand and the fact that people are having lesser purchasing power.
[Guest]: So it will be a sad state of affairs when that happens.
[Guest]: You know, we already see that in some countries where there is a stagnated economy.
[Guest]: I don't think we have a good answer to this.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So we don't have a good answer to this.
[Amit Varma]: Randhir Borkar asks, too late, but please ask how he is smart in so many areas and working
[Amit Varma]: habits.
[Amit Varma]: We've spoken about your working habits, smart in so many areas, yes.
[Amit Varma]: So broader question, which I had listed down, but I thought we don't have time.
[Amit Varma]: So I won't ask.
[Amit Varma]: But now it has come up.
[Amit Varma]: Do you have mental models which you have thought about explicitly through which you kind of
[Amit Varma]: look at the world or you apply them to different subjects and all of that to learn about them
[Amit Varma]: better?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I think I'll say this in three ways, OK?
[Guest]: So one thing, I am not a specialist in anything.
[Guest]: And actually, like, I don't like the word expert as well.
[Guest]: So because I'm definitely not one of them.
[Guest]: But in general, it's difficult to be expert in anything related to human humanities, right?
[Guest]: We are always learning.
[Guest]: So I'm so the way I approach it is think of it in a very general overview.
[Guest]: So what I always advise people who want to start in public policy also that don't go
[Guest]: into one narrow domain in at a very early stage.
[Guest]: A lot of people will start with no health excites me.
[Guest]: So I just want to do public health.
[Guest]: But I would say go the opposite way, you know.
[Guest]: So think of it as two axes.
[Guest]: One is domains and one is disciplines.
[Guest]: So domains are things like health, defense, environment, climate change, whatever, right?
[Guest]: So these are domains of public policy.
[Guest]: And on the other axis is disciplines, which are things like economic reasoning, psychology,
[Guest]: social psychology, sociology, public finance, etc.
[Guest]: So the idea is, don't dive into just one domain.
[Guest]: But think of can you arm yourself with certain key ideas or toolkits from these disciplines
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: And then you so learn all these, you know, public finance, economic reasoning, and then
[Guest]: you can apply them to one or two domains, you know, so you get bored with doing just
[Guest]: one thing.
[Guest]: So why would you just do one domain?
[Guest]: So for example, I would love to do things on foreign policy when I'm bored of it.
[Guest]: I would love to do things in public finance or something else.
[Guest]: So just pick two or three domains and arm yourself with all these disciplines so that
[Guest]: you can apply that frame to a variety of domains.
[Guest]: Another additional thing that happens is, you know, a lot of knowledge generation happens
[Guest]: at the intersection of one domain and one discipline, you know, so for example, a lot
[Guest]: of people will think of Pakistan in a very foreign policy sense, right?
[Guest]: So yeah, there are things which they do to India, and you wouldn't want them to.
[Guest]: So the analysis is very political.
[Guest]: But maybe if you are armed with the principles of public finance, if you are able to read
[Guest]: the budget that Pakistan makes, maybe you will come up with an economic way to coerce
[Guest]: an adversary that you wouldn't have thought of, right?
[Guest]: So you new knowledge generation will always happen at this intersection.
[Guest]: So why be bothered about an academic department sort of mindset, right?
[Guest]: So that is one sort of main idea that I think of.
[Guest]: The second one is, and I think, Amit, you know it best, right to learn instead of reading
[Guest]: to learn only.
[Guest]: So the more we try to write and learn, we develop mental frames to look at variety of
[Guest]: problems.
[Guest]: And we think of things that we ourselves wouldn't have imagined a few years back, right?
[Guest]: So that writing experience opens up those windows.
[Guest]: So that is one thing.
[Guest]: The third thing, and this is not mine, but Hal Varian has a very good idea about this.
[Guest]: He has written a nice paper on how to build an economic model in your spare time, okay?
[Guest]: And that has three really nice insights which I think apply here.
[Guest]: First idea is, where do you get your ideas from, right?
[Guest]: And a lot of people would say, read journal papers and you will get ideas.
[Guest]: He says that's not the way to get good ideas.
[Guest]: Only the way you get good ideas is by reading bad arguments.
[Guest]: So that's why you should be on Twitter, right?
[Guest]: So you will basically get, there's nothing which inspires you to write about something
[Guest]: or investigate than a bad idea, right?
[Guest]: So you will get these really flawed references in your mind.
[Guest]: When you get those, it inspires you to, okay, that's not the way to think and that's why
[Guest]: I'll write it.
[Guest]: So getting ideas through TV or through forums or Twitter is a great way to start off.
[Guest]: It will inspire you to see a frame which you absolutely disagree with.
[Guest]: So that's one first point.
[Guest]: The second one is postpone your literature review.
[Guest]: And this is also something quite counterintuitive.
[Guest]: Once you think of an idea, people will directly dive into what has been done in this field.
[Guest]: And the problem with that is you will eventually come to thinking the way others have already
[Guest]: done and you won't come up with anything new.
[Guest]: So the way he says is postpone literature review, actually think of what you would imagine
[Guest]: the solution to be.
[Guest]: Can you have your own framework?
[Guest]: Can you imagine the way forward?
[Guest]: And once you've done that, then look at literature review.
[Guest]: You will be able to poke holes in your own solution better as well.
[Guest]: So that was the second one.
[Guest]: And the third thing is just giving a seminar.
[Guest]: Just basically discussing your ideas.
[Guest]: And I always say public policy is anyways a team sport.
[Guest]: One person cannot transform India.
[Guest]: Even thousand people cannot transform governance in India.
[Guest]: You need lots and lots of ideas, debates, discussions.
[Guest]: So discussing your ideas, however unformed they might be, is valuable.
[Guest]: You get a lot of feedback and then you are able to improve upon it.
[Guest]: So I think these three things are really nice.
[Guest]: Not mine, but I think a lot of people will benefit from this paper.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, we link it from the show notes and these are really fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I did an episode with Krish Yashok at the end of last year and he spoke about
[Amit Varma]: some pyramid of learning and which are the most intense ways of learning about something.
[Amit Varma]: You know, at the bottom is you just read something or, you know, slightly higher might be when
[Amit Varma]: you when someone tells you and you're listening, but the highest is you teach something because
[Amit Varma]: when you teach it, you have to teach it in a systematic way.
[Amit Varma]: So you're forced to learn it better yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, one of the things I love about Takshashila is so many incredibly smart people
[Amit Varma]: always iterating with each other and trying to teach each other and learning from that.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, you know, writing is also a great way to clarify your thinking on a subject
[Amit Varma]: like Joan Didion once said, quote, I don't know what I think until I write it down, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: And just writing can often, you know, sharpen your thinking because if you want to write
[Amit Varma]: something in clear language devoid of obfuscatory jargon or vague abstract terms, then you're
[Amit Varma]: forced to get really concrete.
[Amit Varma]: And that whole intersection of subjects is also really interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Like I had Gautam Menon on my show, the biologist, and he was talking about how it was so fascinating
[Amit Varma]: for him to go deep into both biology and physics and how much insight there is at the intersection
[Amit Varma]: of those two, which is just wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: Let's quickly move on to Twitter questions.
[Guest]: I'll just add one thing, Amit.
[Guest]: On teaching, right, I absolutely agree, but teaching is when you teach interested students,
[Guest]: if you're teaching for a class, which probably are hoping for a degree or credit, then teaching
[Guest]: doesn't challenge you the way you would want to.
[Guest]: So what if you have a bunch of self selected students who really want to know because they
[Guest]: are interested in it, and it's not because they'll get some job, or they'll get credit,
[Guest]: then teaching is the most powerful way, right?
[Guest]: They challenge you and you will then be dumbfounded, then you will go back, learn, be a better
[Guest]: teacher.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, I would just add that.
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: Myopic Astronomer wants to know, is currency devaluation a credible option for India or
[Amit Varma]: would that be demo 2.0?
[Amit Varma]: Do you have any views on this?
[Amit Varma]: Why is he asking you?
[Guest]: Yeah, I became a macroeconomist.
[Guest]: But there is a very interesting idea about devaluation written about it.
[Guest]: Generally, you know, there was this frame that one rupee should be equal to one dollar,
[Guest]: you know, I've seen WhatsApp messages and all that.
[Guest]: And I was looking at the history of it, right?
[Guest]: And this was obviously earlier, it was intentionally you had the Britishers sort of overvaluing
[Guest]: the currency, right?
[Guest]: And when you have an overvalued currency, it benefited the system where you exported
[Guest]: raw materials and you had a lot of British goods, clothes, etc. coming into India.
[Guest]: So overvaluation actually harmed us.
[Guest]: It was one of the ways in which the colonial economy worked, one of the principal ways
[Guest]: in which.
[Guest]: But there is this notion that still we should have this one rupee equal to one dollar and
[Guest]: it is completely flawed.
[Guest]: And in fact, Manmohan Singh had a really great speech about this.
[Guest]: It is very pervasive, you know, this idea was being discussed in parliament, etc.
[Guest]: And Manmohan Singh very eloquently talks about why this shouldn't be the case.
[Guest]: You know, there is nothing which is prestigious about an overvalued currency or an undervalued.
[Guest]: So I think we can link to that, Manmohan Singh will explain this much better than I can.
[Amit Varma]: Manmohan Singh will explain this and for fans of the current regime who are smoking at the
[Amit Varma]: mention of Manmohan Singh, let's point out that when Manmohan Singh was PM, the rupee
[Amit Varma]: was far closer to being one dollar than it is today.
[Amit Varma]: And I agree that there's not necessarily any one right level for it.
[Amit Varma]: But that's a macroeconomic discussion.
[Amit Varma]: I think I'd asked Ila Patnaik this also in my episode with her.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, that's a different subject.
[Amit Varma]: Shantanu wants to know, quote, I wish to know whether his favorite foreign policy philosophy,
[Amit Varma]: Matsyana, really can answer happenings across the globe.
[Amit Varma]: Top quote and apologies for mispronunciations.
[Guest]: Yeah, Matsyana, right.
[Guest]: So it is law of the fishes.
[Guest]: Yeah, that basically is realism at play, right.
[Guest]: So the fact that big fish eats small fish and Matsyana is a quotidian Arthashastra concept.
[Guest]: But so thinking of whether it applies to the real world.
[Guest]: Yes, it does.
[Guest]: You know, we can explain a lot of things that happen in international relations through
[Guest]: this frame.
[Guest]: Like there are three traditions in foreign policy broadly, which is realism, there is
[Guest]: liberalism and there is constructivism.
[Guest]: And we've discussed this in our last episode.
[Guest]: So I'm not going into more detail.
[Guest]: But yes, Matsyana and realism explain a lot of what happens in the international sphere,
[Guest]: just like how see what US could do in Iraq and Afghanistan, right?
[Guest]: Who could question it, right?
[Guest]: That was also an example of the fact that because they had the power, they could exert
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: There is, yes, something called UNSC and United Nations.
[Guest]: What could they do?
[Guest]: Nothing.
[Guest]: You see that playing even now, right?
[Guest]: Is the fact that you are not even able to investigate whether, where did the coronavirus
[Guest]: pandemic start from, right?
[Guest]: And this just illustrates that power has a big role to play in international relations.
[Guest]: And the one point I would add is, sadly, people apply Matsyana to domestic sphere as well.
[Guest]: And they think everything is Matsyana and it is justified.
[Guest]: That's exactly not the case, right?
[Guest]: When we talk about Matsyana, we are talking about international relations, a different
[Guest]: system.
[Guest]: But in a domestic realm, I mean, we should not want Matsyana to prevail, right?
[Guest]: We would want a republic which ensures our rights irrespective of the power that we have.
[Guest]: And that is why you have the state in the first place.
[Guest]: So the existence of Matsyana in domestic relations would mean that the state has failed.
[Amit Varma]: I guess Matsyana, whatever you call it, is a good descriptive frame to look at international
[Amit Varma]: affairs, which can often be zero sum, but would be a terrible prescriptive frame to
[Amit Varma]: look at domestic affairs where we want to protect everyone's rights and avoid coercion
[Amit Varma]: as far as possible.
[Amit Varma]: Big fish eat little fish instead.
[Amit Varma]: Anirudh Menon has two questions.
[Amit Varma]: First of them is about semiconductors.
[Amit Varma]: What is this?
[Amit Varma]: And the second one is, what fiction are you reading?
[Guest]: Yeah, so actually, as I said, I don't read a lot of fiction.
[Guest]: So first, one of the first tasks that was assigned to me when I joined Takshashila was
[Guest]: to read all Harry Potter books.
[Guest]: And that was like a new learning for me.
[Guest]: And that's where I learned the defense of the dark arts and all that.
[Guest]: So but yeah, I don't read a lot of fiction.
[Guest]: I really love the nonfiction segment itself, just the way the fact is more fun than fiction,
[Guest]: I would say not even the fact that fact is more stranger than fiction.
[Guest]: I don't know how strange fiction is, but I like the fun element of it.
[Guest]: So I read a lot of travelogues kind of thing, city biographies, that is a genre I like but
[Amit Varma]: not so much fiction.
[Amit Varma]: Have you read the Power Broker by Robert Caro?
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: Are you kidding me?
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: Recommendation to you and all my listeners, and old timer listeners would have heard it
[Amit Varma]: before.
[Amit Varma]: The Power Broker by Robert Caro is this masterpiece.
[Amit Varma]: It must be a million words or half one and a half million or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Massive book on it's actually around 800,000 now I remember and I'll tell you why I remember.
[Amit Varma]: It is actually three books in one in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: At one level, it is a biography of this guy called Robert Moses, who designed most of
[Amit Varma]: modern New York and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: At another level, it's a biography of New York, the city over several decades.
[Amit Varma]: And at a third level, it is a study of power, of how power shapes the world and the reason
[Amit Varma]: I remember to say 800,000 was it was originally a million, and he had to cut it down to 800,000.
[Amit Varma]: And out of the 200,000 or so words that he cut out was a book length portion on Jane
[Amit Varma]: Jacobs.
[Amit Varma]: And Jane Jacobs, of course, is one of my heroes.
[Amit Varma]: She wrote the great book, The Death and Life of American Cities.
[Amit Varma]: It's a masterpiece.
[Amit Varma]: And she was constantly in opposition to Moses, because Moses was this top down central planner
[Amit Varma]: kind of person.
[Amit Varma]: And Jane Jacobs was much more about how are the people actually living, what is organically
[Amit Varma]: emerging from there, you got to respect that.
[Amit Varma]: The remarkable figure Jacobs and these are both these books are masterpieces, but you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned biographies of cities and the Power Broker is just kind of on top of my list over
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm sorry, continue.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, that that's it.
[Guest]: I think that kind of books I like but fiction, no.
[Amit Varma]: And I would just say that, you know, nobody should ever pass value judgment on someone
[Amit Varma]: who reads only nonfiction and not fiction or vice versa.
[Amit Varma]: Because the point is that opportunity cost life, you know, time is limited, life is short,
[Amit Varma]: we will all die.
[Amit Varma]: So while we are alive, you want to read things you enjoy reading, you don't want to force
[Amit Varma]: yourself to read because reading diversity or so and so friend has said this is a great
[Amit Varma]: book.
[Amit Varma]: It's part of the canon.
[Amit Varma]: Read what you enjoy reading and feel no guilt whatsoever.
[Amit Varma]: Like I keep saying any reading is good.
[Amit Varma]: You read Chanda Mama also old copies that is good reading is good period.
[Guest]: Yeah, but a lot of people have told me Amit that you must read fiction because it opens
[Guest]: you to newer ways of thinking.
[Guest]: Yeah, so maybe that's true.
[Guest]: I'm probably missing out on that.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, I think great fiction is a very good way of zooming in.
[Amit Varma]: Like a lot of my writing students, I'll find that they'll zoom out very well, where they
[Amit Varma]: discuss things at a broader level, you know, but it's a zooming in which makes fiction
[Amit Varma]: special because, you know, we only live one life.
[Amit Varma]: But when we read fiction, we can live the lives of others, if the fiction is good enough,
[Amit Varma]: and you can only do that, you know, through fiction, really.
[Amit Varma]: And that is valuable, but I still would not pass a value judgment because life is limited.
[Amit Varma]: And if as long as people are reading, I won't pass judgment on what they are reading because
[Amit Varma]: most people are not reading and that's that's a problem.
[Amit Varma]: Moving on, Bhuvanesh Selvaraj has questions about foreign service, space diplomacy, South
[Amit Varma]: American relations.
[Amit Varma]: Hey, I'm really sorry, some other episode, we'll talk about all these things, but no
[Amit Varma]: foreign policy today.
[Amit Varma]: Sai Krishna is NITK alum.
[Amit Varma]: He wants to know about your life at NITK and our private beach.
[Amit Varma]: So you've spoken about your life at NITK.
[Amit Varma]: But what is this private beach?
[Guest]: No, the college had a beach.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: Nothing happened there.
[Amit Varma]: You didn't go streaking through the beach one night after having seven old monks.
[Guest]: No, no, I didn't that.
[Guest]: The good thing is that that was the USP of the college, right?
[Guest]: So you had a lovely old sort of a temple and it was on sort of a cliff and on the other
[Guest]: side of the temple, like you pass through the temple, another door opens and you sit
[Guest]: on the cliff and you can see the sunset, right?
[Guest]: So just imagine.
[Guest]: So that entire experience made a lot of us go to temple.
[Guest]: So you can imagine the only reason people would go is because you get this beautiful
[Guest]: view.
[Amit Varma]: Marvelous.
[Amit Varma]: Molly at Abhinav Molly asks an interesting question, quote, let's get an economist to
[Amit Varma]: answer Reddit's favorite AMA question.
[Amit Varma]: Would it be better to fight one horse-sized duck or 100 duck-sized horses?
[Unknown]: Yeah, I have.
[Guest]: I'm just thinking about this.
[Guest]: What lens would you apply to this comparative advantage?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: I really don't.
[Amit Varma]: I'll give my answer and then you can give yours.
[Amit Varma]: The first time I've seen this question, it's a lovely question.
[Amit Varma]: One horse-sized duck or 100 duck-sized horses.
[Amit Varma]: I would rather fight one horse-sized duck for the simple reason that I would assume
[Amit Varma]: that these creatures have me overpowered anyway.
[Amit Varma]: But the only way I can get away is if my opponent makes a mental mistake or if I can outthink
[Amit Varma]: the opponent.
[Amit Varma]: And it is more likely for me to outthink one opponent than to outthink a hundred opponents.
[Amit Varma]: So I would opt to fight the one horse-sized duck rather than a hundred duck-sized horses,
[Amit Varma]: assuming they are all equally hostile to me, which I don't see why it would be the case
[Amit Varma]: because I have a very convivial relationship with both ducks and horses in the past and
[Amit Varma]: have not tried to ride either.
[Guest]: Do you have any kind of answer now?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: I mean, after you put it this way, maybe, yeah, it's similar.
[Guest]: But it depends, no, we need to know what are the assumptions made.
[Guest]: So the hundred things might actually fight amongst themselves.
[Guest]: So they might not be concentrated on you as an adversary.
[Guest]: So there are so many other variables that you need to take into account.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah, good question for both of us to think about.
[Amit Varma]: Thaul asks a question about Matsyana, we've already done that.
[Amit Varma]: Bharatan asks, what does Kutasana mean?
[Amit Varma]: We've done that.
[Amit Varma]: Kautilya Subramaniam asks, what are his main sources for IR news?
[Amit Varma]: What does he read on a daily basis, religiously, if any?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So one thing I realized, Amit, I think one is just creating good Twitter lists helps.
[Guest]: So I have lists for my subject area.
[Guest]: So more than the feed, I just go to TweetDeck and look at the list.
[Guest]: That helps me.
[Guest]: The second thing is just using the good old RSS reader.
[Guest]: So subscribe to a lot of things on that and just go and read that.
[Guest]: So maybe you will have Foreign Affairs, that magazine, Economist, Economist is really great
[Guest]: for someone who's interested in a bunch of things.
[Guest]: So I have like around 600-700 sources in that OPML file and just follow that is my idea.
[Guest]: Because otherwise you end up reading so broadly that you might miss out the important things.
[Guest]: So just using the RSS reader helps me focus on the things that I want to.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: What do you do?
[Amit Varma]: Reading broadly and in a dispersed way.
[Amit Varma]: No, I found your answer very curious and I'll ask a follow up question.
[Amit Varma]: Because not curious, I don't mean that in I mean, I found it interesting.
[Amit Varma]: I am curious about learning more, because it strikes me that a lot of my reading is
[Amit Varma]: too broad and too dispersed.
[Amit Varma]: And I wish I could, you know, build some kind of system which it seems to me that you have
[Amit Varma]: done.
[Amit Varma]: So apart from having the system where you have sort of curated lists or feeds or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: are there also specific times of the day you give to reading and I have to change this
[Amit Varma]: habit where I'll just be on Twitter or I'll be wherever and I'll just hit links at random
[Amit Varma]: and I'll forget about them a minute later and I'll have 800 tabs open and until my computer
[Amit Varma]: just gives up.
[Amit Varma]: So do you have a system of reading and taking in knowledge?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I, to be frank, I don't have a great system either.
[Guest]: But what I do is, for example, if there's a PDF, I will always read it not on the browser,
[Guest]: but I will download it on a software like Mendeley and use that to read.
[Guest]: So all my PDFs will be in one place that I read later.
[Guest]: Yeah, other articles, yeah, I'll just read the way you do.
[Guest]: But just the idea that instead of reading in the tabs, you read on your RSS reader makes
[Guest]: you go towards the things you really want to write and I keep changing those RSS feeds.
[Guest]: So sometimes if I'm interested in, say, semiconductors, I will just put some Google alerts in that
[Guest]: RSS feed.
[Guest]: So I read news, but through the RSS feeds, which will help me focus on a particular area
[Guest]: instead of going to news.google.co.in where you might read about Tapsee Pannu's review
[Guest]: of a particular movie, I will then read about semiconductors.
[Guest]: So that sort of helps sometimes.
[Guest]: I don't have a definite time of the day for reading.
[Guest]: I have a definite time of the day for writing.
[Guest]: So that helps me in sort of trying to collect.
[Guest]: Which is which is what?
[Guest]: So newsletters, for example, I always write on Saturday nights.
[Guest]: So it's, yeah, 8, 8.30pm to whatever 1pm, 1am, 2am, whatever time it may take.
[Guest]: So through the week, I'm trying to collate thoughts, I have made a list of topics that
[Guest]: I come across when I read the newspaper or on Twitter or wherever bad ideas, good ideas.
[Guest]: And I'm constantly jotting them down, thinking through them through the week and noting them
[Guest]: down on Obsidian.
[Guest]: So taking notes whenever they strike, and then do focus writing during the weekend.
[Guest]: Otherwise, if it is op-eds, etc, then it is again in the evenings, generally, just the
[Guest]: same time after dinner, and don't sleep until you've finished.
[Amit Varma]: And I love your newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, also done an episode with Raghu Sanjay Lal Jaitley, your co-writer, who calls
[Amit Varma]: himself RLJ these days, and keeps reminding me of the Rock Street Journal, which used
[Amit Varma]: to be this music magazine, indie music magazine in India in the 1990s.
[Amit Varma]: I am, by the way, the only person in the world who has had his byline in both Rock Street
[Amit Varma]: Journal and Wall Street Journal.
[Amit Varma]: So no one else has that unique honor.
[Amit Varma]: So how is it like writing with him?
[Amit Varma]: Like one thing I've noticed is that always the first piece in the newsletter will be
[Amit Varma]: by RLJ.
[Amit Varma]: So is this out of modesty that like, do you put it together and you just put his on top
[Amit Varma]: because he's such a nice guy?
[Amit Varma]: What's the deal?
[Amit Varma]: And do you play off each other?
[Amit Varma]: Do you sometimes during the week, do you discuss that I'm writing about this?
[Amit Varma]: What are you writing about?
[Guest]: How does it work?
[Guest]: Okay, I have met RLJ only once in my life.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So it's always been communication through either WhatsApp or on the phone very rarely.
[Guest]: So both of us work very independently on this.
[Guest]: So he writes his stuff, and I write on topics that I want to.
[Guest]: Sometimes there have been editions where I had a comment or a rebuttal to what he wrote
[Guest]: and things like that.
[Guest]: So that's the way it is.
[Guest]: And the reason why his writing was upfront is because he finishes always before than
[Guest]: I do.
[Guest]: So I am always the person who's sending the things towards the end.
[Guest]: So that's why it was and RLJ is a much better writer than I am.
[Guest]: So I always put his writing up front so that maybe people would then read mine as well.
[Amit Varma]: That's incredibly modest.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know what to say because I love both of your writings.
[Amit Varma]: And you both write in different ways, but you are two of my favorite thinkers.
[Amit Varma]: So honestly, just seeing you writing one newsletter is like mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: And if anybody hasn't subscribed to Anticipating the Unintended, please do so.
[Amit Varma]: It's at publicpolicy.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: We'll also be linked from the show notes, obviously, two of our finest thinkers and
[Amit Varma]: also most modest thinkers like what is this even?
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: So let us move on to next Twitter question, Devashish Patel, Aditya Vajha and someone
[Amit Varma]: called Naren who just put a plus one to Aditya's question, all have the same question about
[Amit Varma]: how do you move into a public policy career from an IT career?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think that was the transition I also made so I can relate to it.
[Guest]: But the idea is now the options are much, much more than they were back then, you know,
[Guest]: like public policy is literally a course that is there in a department which is in so many
[Guest]: universities in India now.
[Guest]: So that has opened.
[Guest]: So my way of thinking about this was, again, minimize opportunity cost, right.
[Guest]: So idea was, I am working in a particular area, I have, I know nothing about public
[Guest]: policy.
[Guest]: So can I take a course while I'm working?
[Guest]: And that's the great thing that Takshashila offers, right, the GCP because it is meant
[Guest]: for working professionals, people who don't know about this topic, but want to explore
[Guest]: it, right.
[Guest]: So it's a sachet course for someone wanting to know.
[Guest]: So that's how I started and I will also probably recommend it to people who want to get into
[Guest]: this area that try it out first, you will know something and if it really, you know,
[Guest]: it lights a bulb in your head, and you want to actually explore this further, then there
[Guest]: are various opportunities, you know, now, companies have public policy departments,
[Guest]: they recruit people, then there are, of course, governments also have opened up, you know,
[Guest]: on contract positions where hiring happens.
[Guest]: So there are many, many more avenues now.
[Guest]: So maybe start small first.
[Guest]: And then if you're interested, either do a master's, PhD, or directly jump into public
[Guest]: policy careers itself.
[Guest]: What I will say is people looking to recruit in this area need two or three things, one
[Guest]: writing skills, so they always focus on really good writing skills, they can do my writing
[Amit Varma]: course for that and the rest they can learn from Takshashila.
[Guest]: And second one is economic reasoning.
[Guest]: So if these two are really sort of fundamentals that you built on, then you can directly jump
[Guest]: into a career, try a few things and explore it.
[Guest]: So what I would say is there are lots of options.
[Guest]: And this is a career where we need a lot of people from different disciplines to come
[Guest]: and contribute.
[Guest]: And our public discourse will be richer and better if that happens.
[Guest]: So please do if you are in an IT career, consider thinking public policy is fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: So before we move on with the questions, tell me more about this upcoming Takshashila course.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, why people study public policy, what kind of things do you teach, what they
[Amit Varma]: can expect?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit more about that.
[Amit Varma]: Because I you know, I've for your postgraduate course, I taught this thing on how to write
[Amit Varma]: an op-ed for a brief file, which was where I first two, three years ago got the idea
[Amit Varma]: for the writing course I do now.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm very grateful for that.
[Amit Varma]: And I was given access to the all the other lectures.
[Amit Varma]: So while I haven't done the course, I have a fair idea of the content.
[Amit Varma]: And it is mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: Like I wish I had sort of done this course when I was in my 20s, because it would just
[Amit Varma]: have made the way I look at the world so much clearer and so much better and just an incredible
[Amit Varma]: bunch of teachers also, you know, people like you and Nitin and Manoj and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit, tell us, tell my listeners a little bit more about this course.
[Amit Varma]: When does it start?
[Amit Varma]: What's the process?
[Amit Varma]: Why should they learn?
[Amit Varma]: And how will you go about it?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I'll start with the why and then come to the course earlier.
[Guest]: So the idea is, again, it's about thinking of the demand side and the supply side, right?
[Guest]: So we are trying to address the demand side here.
[Guest]: The idea is that if our discourse is better, if we are asking the right things of the government
[Guest]: and the right questions, maybe we might get the right answers, right?
[Guest]: So it's trying to address that demand side of the question.
[Guest]: And that's why there are a lot of think tanks, you know, think tanks in US have are much
[Guest]: older than the Indian Republic itself, you know, Brookings completed 100 years in 2016.
[Guest]: Can you imagine?
[Guest]: So think tanks do exist.
[Guest]: But the idea is, a lot of think tanks are either in capitals, thinking about changing
[Guest]: policy with the policymakers, right?
[Guest]: But our thinking was that you need the other side as well, right?
[Guest]: Address the demand side as well, improve the level of public discourse, then change will
[Guest]: happen regardless of who is at the helm.
[Guest]: So that's why this course exists, and it is trying to address the demand side.
[Guest]: Now what we are seeing is it also probably addresses the supply side, you know, because
[Guest]: in one sense, we also found out gaps, like the fact that most of the technology companies
[Guest]: which now exist, are often operating in gray areas, right?
[Guest]: Not because they are shady, but the fact that our government laws are such, right?
[Guest]: You need laws which are old style.
[Guest]: And then, for example, I'll just give you an example, one of our alumni operates this
[Guest]: scooter rental startup.
[Guest]: And the idea was, there was no law for that, you know, and the law prohibited many things
[Guest]: that they wanted to do.
[Guest]: So you need public policy to come in and work with the government, tell them that why certain
[Guest]: things are better, why it will help the ecosystem as a whole.
[Guest]: It's not just lobbying for your company, but it's about explaining why certain things when
[Guest]: banned can result in certain other consequences.
[Guest]: And when you allow it, what are the economic benefits you can unlock, right?
[Guest]: So it's a really interesting thing to look at.
[Guest]: The second thing from the supply side also is, for example, people within the government
[Guest]: also, maybe armed forces officers or others, might be looking at a thing from the lens
[Guest]: that they are used to, right?
[Guest]: So for example, armed forces officials will know everything about the tactical side of
[Guest]: things, right?
[Guest]: But how does that relate to India's economic goals?
[Guest]: How does, you know, India not having good relations with the US impact India's defense,
[Guest]: for example, right, or China, for that matter, these things, the bigger connections, the
[Guest]: course is able to make, you know, and that is useful for people who are within the government
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: The third one, yeah, a lot of people are aspirants of UPSC, etc.
[Guest]: They are also the type of people who join the course.
[Guest]: And what we tell them is this course will not help you crack the UPSC.
[Guest]: Definitely not.
[Guest]: That's a clear thing, which is upfront.
[Guest]: But it might help you once you get into the government, the way you will think about price
[Guest]: caps, the way you will think about incentives, the way you think about government itself
[Guest]: as a complex of principles and agents will be definitely different, you know, so that
[Guest]: is how I would say why public policy sort of learning it is important.
[Guest]: It is important, even if you just want to be a more engaged citizen.
[Guest]: And it is also important if you want to actually go into the government.
[Guest]: Now coming to the course.
[Guest]: So the course is called GCPP.
[Guest]: And it started way back in 2012, Nitin and co-founders of Takshashila got that together.
[Guest]: And the background of this was actually the citizens against corruption, that entire movement
[Guest]: that had happened, right.
[Guest]: And a lot of people asked that, you know, if that's not the right way to go.
[Guest]: And I think Nitin had written a column on why that's not the right way to go.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So the idea was, what is the way out then if protests were not the way to go?
[Guest]: And that was the reason why the course started that, you know, we actually didn't have good
[Guest]: answers, if people have this question.
[Guest]: And the idea was that, then can we get smart people together, and at least discuss some
[Guest]: of these concepts.
[Guest]: It's not so much teaching, but just bringing people from different disciplines together,
[Guest]: and exposing them to certain ideas that they wouldn't have come across.
[Guest]: So that's the origin of the GCPP.
[Guest]: And it's sort of in its 30th cohort, it's a 12 week course.
[Guest]: And it is meant for people who are working again, keep opportunity costs low.
[Guest]: So people who want to learn about this, start learning it, even while you're working.
[Guest]: And there are three main streams.
[Guest]: One is the fundamentals of public policy, where we discuss these ideas, which we talked
[Guest]: about today.
[Guest]: The second one is economic reasoning, really getting people to know the fundamentals of
[Guest]: microeconomics.
[Guest]: And the third one is about public communication.
[Guest]: So we talk a lot about writing, the importance of narratives, the importance of stakeholder
[Guest]: management, etc.
[Guest]: So these are the three components.
[Guest]: And by the end of the course, people are equipped enough to write a policy proposal by themselves.
[Guest]: So think through an entire policy question in a systematic manner and write a proposal
[Guest]: down.
[Guest]: And that sort of is really pathbreaking for a lot of people.
[Guest]: It was for me definitely when I did this in 2013, because it gave me the confidence that
[Guest]: I can systematically think of a problem and bring out a solution, even though I've never
[Guest]: worked in the government, right.
[Guest]: So just that act sort of gives in a lot of confidence.
[Guest]: And what it did to me personally, was it changed the way I parse news, just add a completely
[Guest]: new frame of reference to look at the happenings in the world.
[Guest]: Otherwise, it's very easy to get dejected by what happens in the world, and just think
[Guest]: that everything's going wrong.
[Guest]: But that helped me put some frame of reference to why things happen the way they do.
[Guest]: And that was like a big learning point for me.
[Amit Varma]: You know, a note for my listeners, one thing I sometimes do is at the end of every year,
[Amit Varma]: I kind of like to look back and say that how has this year changed me?
[Amit Varma]: How have I grown in this year?
[Amit Varma]: What have I done in this year?
[Amit Varma]: And the answer is usually disappointing, and I could have done so much more.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, Jan 1, I am lying there depressing, shit, I wasted another year.
[Amit Varma]: But I would say that, one, it's a good practice, and two, this course is like 12 weeks, like
[Amit Varma]: it's 12 weekends, right, basically Saturdays, you spend a few hours, you know, just do it.
[Amit Varma]: If you if you have any interest in this subject, which I assume you do, because you've heard
[Amit Varma]: more than three hours of Pranay chatting with me about just these subjects.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, why not could be could be life changing.
[Amit Varma]: And even if it isn't life changing, at least you have another frame, you have a more refined
[Amit Varma]: frame perhaps to look at the world.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: Let's get back to our Twitter questions, we asked questions.
[Guest]: I would add to the summit, by the way, the course is not for the faint hearted in the
[Guest]: sense that beyond the Saturdays, there are assignments and all to do.
[Guest]: But what I can guarantee is, you will enjoy it, it's, we have a lot of games, etc.
[Guest]: And the idea is, it's, it's a lot of fun.
[Guest]: You don't want to have a course which people are taking out of their own volition to be
[Guest]: boring, right.
[Guest]: So that's one thing we are very conscious about.
[Guest]: And making it more fun is the whole aim, but it is rigorous.
[Guest]: So a lot of people need to put in at least I would say, eight to 10 hours a week for
[Guest]: this course.
[Guest]: So that will give you the results that you want.
[Amit Varma]: Excellent, highly recommended.
[Amit Varma]: Meanwhile, we better get back to Twitter, otherwise people will go crazy, we asked questions
[Amit Varma]: and we were ignored.
[Amit Varma]: Not a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: Asad wants to know, how does he fight procrastination in daily life?
[Amit Varma]: And then stuff about your economic student journey, which you've covered, but how do
[Amit Varma]: you fight procrastination?
[Guest]: That's a good question.
[Guest]: I think just having those habits help, you know, so I used to procrastinate a lot on
[Guest]: again writing as well as a bunch of things that I have to write, but they never translate
[Guest]: into so their idea is there, but it's never you don't write it.
[Guest]: But things like having a newsletter, etc helped me a lot, because I know that you have to
[Guest]: get something out by that time, you know, so there's no room for procrastination after
[Guest]: that, if you have promised your reader that you're going to get something out, you have
[Guest]: to do it.
[Guest]: So I think that is what you put yourself in these situations.
[Guest]: That sort of helps.
[Guest]: Otherwise, I mean, for example, if you have a column, it helps, right?
[Guest]: You wouldn't have that issue if you have a column, because you know, you have a deadline.
[Guest]: But I haven't had a column.
[Guest]: So it's used to write an op-ed, then the editors will sit for it for two weeks.
[Guest]: By that time, you will anyways be dejected about that topic, right?
[Guest]: So that didn't give me that sense of writing regularly.
[Guest]: But when you have something like, say a newsletter, or you have promised yourself that I'm going
[Guest]: to get something out a particular week or a particular day, then I think things fall
[Guest]: into place, you just make it work.
[Guest]: So it's promising yourself rather than anything else.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this is I think, what psychologists call a commitment device.
[Amit Varma]: And I started a newsletter for the same reason.
[Amit Varma]: But then a lot of shit happened, personal shit happened in April, and I just got swamped.
[Amit Varma]: And I didn't write it for the longest time.
[Amit Varma]: So I need to revive one of these days, because I thought I'll do two or three a week.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just, I haven't done it for months, but I'm going to get back to it.
[Amit Varma]: And commitment devices are useful, like, you know, I would like thank God my power, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the scene in the unseen is a weekly podcast, and because now it has a listenership
[Amit Varma]: that it does, that I have to come out with it, no matter what happens, like recent weeks,
[Amit Varma]: I felt very burnt out things haven't always been going well.
[Amit Varma]: But I have to come out with it every week, because there are just too many people who
[Amit Varma]: listen to it and will be disappointed if I don't.
[Amit Varma]: And that's great.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe the newsletter had just started.
[Amit Varma]: So it hadn't reached that sort of cultic level, where I have to worry about those things.
[Amit Varma]: So commitment devices are useful, do set them for yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Be like Pranay, don't be like me when it comes to things like newsletters.
[Guest]: But Amit, I would just add, I'm so amazed that you've done this podcast alone for week
[Guest]: on week, 200 and what 30 odd times.
[Guest]: One commitment device that works for me is always work with someone else.
[Guest]: Most of the things I do, and it also comes from this frame that public policy in general
[Guest]: is a team sport, you will be wrong.
[Guest]: So you it's better to have someone else so that you can refine your idea.
[Guest]: So I try to work with people.
[Guest]: And that helps, you know, then both people can inspire each other, right.
[Guest]: And sometimes when you are not in a mood to write, you see RSJ has already written his
[Guest]: edition, then you will be under pressure and say, Okay, now I have to write there's no
[Guest]: way that I can ditch what someone else has already written.
[Guest]: So that similarly with Puliyabazi, because Saurabh is there, I am inspired to keep doing
[Guest]: things week on week.
[Guest]: So I guess that also helps.
[Guest]: So I'm really amazed how you've done this alone over 232 weeks, how have you done that?
[Amit Varma]: I have somehow done it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I've somehow done it.
[Amit Varma]: So it I mean, it is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: But by the way, I've for my listeners, I've appeared on Puliyabazi, where I've done an
[Amit Varma]: episode where I've spoken about Hayek in Hindi for one hour, which is quite an achievement.
[Amit Varma]: I myself don't know how I managed.
[Guest]: There are fascinating comments on it, Amit, you should read on Castbox and others, and
[Guest]: you will realize why we need to do more such discussions in Hindi.
[Amit Varma]: So you're done, I'm shifting house this month, and I'm going to set up a YouTube studio in
[Amit Varma]: my new house.
[Amit Varma]: So we shall do something, we'll show it, we'll also come to the field, what is it?
[Amit Varma]: Okay, now our next question is from Durga Ravindran, I think I better revert back to
[Amit Varma]: English because Durga will be like WTF dude.
[Amit Varma]: So Durga asks, why is it so difficult to bridge theoretical knowledge and policy implementation
[Amit Varma]: in India?
[Amit Varma]: Why do we fail to see the unintended?
[Amit Varma]: What would a roadmap to fix this look like?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think the road to this is just understanding things better, right.
[Guest]: And that's why being equipped with public policy knowledge from wherever you get it,
[Guest]: you do a course or you read up things by yourself is really important.
[Guest]: Because again, like public policy, we already come up with so much baggage to it that we
[Guest]: already have solutions, right.
[Guest]: And Land Pritchett has a great video, I mean, again, we can share it about selling solutions
[Guest]: versus defining problems.
[Guest]: So even people who think they are rational, will actually frame a policy problem as a
[Guest]: lack of their favorite solution.
[Guest]: So they will say, okay, what's the problem with education, there are not enough teachers.
[Guest]: So the only solution to that is have more teachers, right.
[Guest]: So you've already thought of a solution and you're framing a problem as an absence of
[Guest]: it, you know, so it's a solution masquerading as a problem.
[Guest]: But the idea would be, can you think so the hack that he gives us a problem is not a problem
[Guest]: until and unless you can have three mutually exclusive solutions for solving that same
[Guest]: problem, right.
[Guest]: So if you look at it from that frame of reference, maybe you will be able to define problems
[Guest]: better before even coming to solutions, right.
[Guest]: So such things are needed.
[Guest]: And second thing is, again, just being open to the fact that you don't know the world,
[Guest]: you know, use of knowledge in society, the essay that Hayek wrote, those kinds of things
[Guest]: illustrate that we don't know enough.
[Guest]: So if we are open to our priors being updated through public policy, then we'll be able
[Guest]: to anticipate the unintended.
[Guest]: Most of the times I often feel that people will already have solutions, they've already
[Guest]: figured out that this is the way it works, then there is no learning to be had, right.
[Guest]: Then there's no point of reading or taking a course just to reaffirm your existing biases,
[Guest]: then what's the point?
[Guest]: So that's why I think we fall into this idea that we already know things.
[Guest]: So public policy, what do we need to learn about it?
[Guest]: What's there to be learned from economic reasoning?
[Guest]: But if we go back a step and try to think of these disciplines in a systematic manner,
[Guest]: then maybe we'll be able to anticipate the unintended much better.
[Amit Varma]: Marvellous.
[Amit Varma]: Durga also asks another good question.
[Amit Varma]: Has he faced any skillset gap in his career without a master's in policy economics?
[Guest]: How did he deal with it?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I don't think I have faced that as such in terms of, I don't think I needed degree
[Guest]: or certificate in order to sort of learn about that.
[Guest]: So that's the way I see it.
[Guest]: And it's great that Takshashila has given me that opportunity, even though I don't have
[Guest]: a thappa from college.
[Guest]: So the idea is, if you're curious and if you're learning things on your own, also discussing,
[Guest]: learning from others, then a degree as such is not something which is a must.
[Guest]: Having said that, the thing is public policy discipline is a very new discipline in India.
[Guest]: So it has not ossified to the extent that other disciplines have.
[Guest]: So for example, if you are probably applying as an economist, people will tell you that
[Guest]: you need to have a PhD in economics.
[Guest]: But that's not the case in public policy.
[Guest]: So we've had many people who after doing GCPP have gone on to work in governments or taken
[Guest]: up journalism jobs or taken up jobs with other companies in public policy departments.
[Guest]: So it's not that you need a master's tag or anything.
[Guest]: It's more about the learning and the skill set that you develop, not the degree that
[Guest]: you get.
[Guest]: So if you can write well, if you can reason well, if you have a broad understanding of
[Guest]: many disciplines, then a lot of people I see are willing to hire people in this area, right?
[Guest]: It's not so much about an MPA or an MPP.
[Amit Varma]: Well, like you said, I guess the newness of the discipline helps.
[Amit Varma]: But as a general question, not about public policy per se, would it be fair to say that
[Amit Varma]: there is a tradeoff between formal education and self-taught?
[Amit Varma]: And the tradeoff is that the danger of a formal education is that, like you said, you get
[Amit Varma]: ossified in certain ways of thinking and can't think beyond that, and might even get tied
[Amit Varma]: to an ideology or, you know, be incentivized to follow whatever is the academic fashion
[Amit Varma]: of the day, which is a negative side.
[Amit Varma]: But the positive side is that you get a systematic exposure to different frames of thinking,
[Amit Varma]: that you become a part of a community of peers who are also experts in that subject, and
[Amit Varma]: you learn and grow from that.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, I would guess that being self-taught means that you are going to have
[Amit Varma]: a little more dynamism because self-taught after all means that you were driven to teach
[Amit Varma]: yourself that and that makes a difference.
[Amit Varma]: So is that like a fair summation of the tradeoffs as it were?
[Guest]: Yeah, I would say the systematic learning is absolutely necessary in public policy,
[Guest]: especially because you need a network of people to correct you, because as we said, we'll
[Guest]: have biases, we'll never learn from them.
[Guest]: So and having a systematic way of thinking is absolutely necessary.
[Guest]: I would just say it's not necessary that you have a particular degree which says that you
[Guest]: know this, you know.
[Guest]: So yeah, maybe you take a bachelor's course, a level course in a college which is teaching
[Guest]: you this or you might just take an elective in a college which teaches is that is also
[Guest]: fine.
[Guest]: But I was just referring to the question that you need a master's in a particular thing.
[Guest]: But I definitely think more than systematic thinking, it's just being with other people,
[Guest]: other smart people learning from them, learning their frames of reference, to see what you
[Guest]: were where you are going wrong is really important in public policy, I would say.
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: So what I'm going to do is I've taken almost four hours of your time, I won't take too
[Amit Varma]: much more.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll take it like coffee with current, which I presume is your favorite talk show,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: They have this rapid fire at the end.
[Amit Varma]: So I will ask the rest of the questions as a rapid fire.
[Amit Varma]: And I want rapid answer also.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, apologies to someone who's asked something really detailed.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm going to ignore questions about semiconductors, we'll do a special episode on semiconductors
[Amit Varma]: at a later point in time.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't know there was something like semiconductor Twitter, but it seems that there is.
[Amit Varma]: So anyway, fastest, not fastest, I was about to say fastest finger first, no, rapid fire.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: Manas Sharma asks, how does he do such a good impression of a minister?
[Guest]: When did I do that?
[Guest]: No idea.
[Amit Varma]: See, like ministers, you're denying it also.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: Niharika Yadav asks experience with teaching versus doing public policy in India.
[Amit Varma]: I guess this requires a longer answer, but you've already actually gone over a lot of
[Amit Varma]: this in this episode, anything Pithi to add?
[Guest]: Yeah, I would just say, yeah, both are important and teaching really gives a new lens.
[Guest]: If you are teaching it to a bunch of self selected people who are interested.
[Guest]: So yeah, teaching is important.
[Guest]: So I would say both give you a really well rounded base in public policy.
[Guest]: And yeah, just doing one of them will not complete the picture.
[Guest]: But I guess both make you better at doing the other.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: Next question is from Abhishek.
[Amit Varma]: Why did you remove the Mandarin version of the name on your profile?
[Guest]: Yeah, because I stopped learning it.
[Guest]: So I felt bad.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: Suitably sheepish.
[Amit Varma]: No grand geopolitical reasons and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Excellent.
[Amit Varma]: Pranjal Dubey asks, ask him to give examples of his favorite quote, change happens at the
[Amit Varma]: margin.
[Amit Varma]: Give just one example.
[Guest]: Yeah, the great example is about the economic growth, right?
[Guest]: This idea in 1991, whatever changed, the change happened at the margin.
[Guest]: Now you can argue that people who were the most disadvantaged in India didn't face any
[Guest]: benefits of this, there is still poverty, etc.
[Guest]: But at the margin, people who had say some benefit of education before or had some skill
[Guest]: before, benefited immensely from whatever has happened since 1991.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So that is what it means that change happens at the margin, change might not always happen
[Guest]: to the most disadvantaged section.
[Guest]: But that doesn't mean that, that government should focus only on the most disadvantaged
[Guest]: section, right?
[Guest]: If it can make changes at the margin, a lot of good things happen.
[Amit Varma]: A lot of good things happen to the most disadvantaged also.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Like I think you'll agree with me about Mahatma Gandhi's metric for public policy.
[Amit Varma]: He didn't use these exact words, but his metric was that for every action, the one thing I
[Amit Varma]: ask myself is, what will be the impact of this on the poorest of the poor?
[Amit Varma]: And I think for all of us in India, this is a good metric to have.
[Amit Varma]: And all my arguments for, you know, more individual freedom, respecting individual autonomy, economic
[Amit Varma]: freedom, especially, all come down from this, that the impact on the poor is the only thing
[Amit Varma]: that I look at.
[Amit Varma]: And that is why I support all of these things in.
[Guest]: Yeah, but there's a nuance here, Amit, like, for example, if you have limited resources,
[Guest]: and you want to bring change, which will be in the case of the government, where would
[Guest]: the government put its money on?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: That is a challenge.
[Guest]: So for example, you want to bring out economic growth, you want to bring make everyone prosperous,
[Guest]: maybe the effort that you would require to do this in a far flung village will require
[Guest]: more effort, more resources, whereas maybe you can impact a lot more number of people
[Guest]: who are at the margin and require some barriers that government has artificially put to be
[Guest]: brought down.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So the ideas both are important, but it shouldn't happen that the government says, I will stop,
[Guest]: I will only do things when I can influence the poorest of the poor.
[Guest]: That never happens, and that will just lead to us expending humongous amount of resources
[Guest]: on bringing a change, which could have had a much better impact in another way.
[Amit Varma]: Fair point.
[Amit Varma]: Yashovardhan Singh says, thought you have discontinued the podcast, sir.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know whether that is addressed to you or me.
[Amit Varma]: Have you discontinued Puliyabazi?
[Guest]: No, no, it's still going on.
[Amit Varma]: We have not discontinued anything, we will go on till we drop.
[Amit Varma]: Saurabh says, reforms in IAS, it's not even a question, it's just the three words.
[Amit Varma]: Should happen.
[Amit Varma]: Great.
[Amit Varma]: Excellent answer.
[Amit Varma]: Anushka Jain says, who is RLJ?
[Amit Varma]: My reply to her, by the way, I replied to her was Raghu Sanjay Lal Jaitley, which has
[Amit Varma]: not amused her, I think.
[Amit Varma]: So neither will you answer that nor will I.
[Guest]: I can only say I am not RLJ.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's obvious because RLJ has come on my show and he talks very differently from
[Amit Varma]: you.
[Amit Varma]: So clearly you are not RLJ.
[Amit Varma]: And I will only say that while Pranay said he has met RLJ once, I have never met him.
[Amit Varma]: OK, so, so it, you know, it's it's it will have to, I'm afraid, remain a mystery.
[Amit Varma]: Now I had a whole bunch of new notifications.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just going to refresh this and see if there are any other questions that I have.
[Amit Varma]: Another semiconductor question, what has happened?
[Amit Varma]: Some doubting doc says he has an intelligent man crush on you.
[Amit Varma]: Who doesn't?
[Amit Varma]: Which intelligent man doesn't have an intelligent man crush on Pranay, especially after this
[Amit Varma]: episode is what I want to know.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just scrolling down.
[Amit Varma]: OK, we have covered most of it.
[Amit Varma]: I guess I didn't give enough notice to these guys.
[Amit Varma]: But I'll end with a kind of a final question.
[Amit Varma]: And I already know one of your answers to this, but I'm sure you have other answers
[Amit Varma]: also.
[Amit Varma]: And this is basically about, OK, where at the end of the episode people are not satisfied.
[Amit Varma]: My listeners are voracious for knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: So recommend some books for them to read, not just on public policy, perhaps, but what
[Amit Varma]: do you think are foundational books to the way that you think about the world?
[Amit Varma]: And I know one of the books you'll recommend, of course, is what Manoj also recommended,
[Amit Varma]: I think, Policy Paradox by Deborah Stone, right?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: The Law of History is one that really influenced me a lot in terms of just thinking what lessons
[Guest]: can we derive in a variety of spheres, from biology to foreign affairs.
[Guest]: So I would recommend that really short book.
[Guest]: But what do you call insights per square inch are the highest in that book, I would say.
[Guest]: Second, I really read like the Gandhi Tagore debates, I think that's one book which actually
[Guest]: I became emotional after reading just because I couldn't imagine two people could disagree
[Guest]: so nicely, you know, so in a way that is seems so foreign now, you know, opposite of Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But just like seen unseen.
[Guest]: I would have loved to have Gandhi and Tagore on seen unseen.
[Guest]: But we should have fought then.
[Guest]: I mean, we should disagree fundamentally.
[Amit Varma]: I think we agree on a lot of points.
[Amit Varma]: We disagree on a few things, you know, like one of them is on whether we disagree or not,
[Amit Varma]: which immediately makes a person who says we don't disagree wrong, because we have clearly
[Amit Varma]: disagreed on that.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe 100 years later, we'll be the Tagore and Gandhi for a new generation.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: So I would surely recommend that people who want to understand Indian polity, there are
[Guest]: two different views, and both of them have relevance in today's age.
[Guest]: So recommend that a book that I would another book I would recommend is factfulness.
[Guest]: I think that was so important that again, we think of the world in often that everything
[Guest]: is going in the dumps and this book will set the right context as to what are the more
[Guest]: important problem and where have we come ahead in terms of progress on a lot of things.
[Guest]: So that human kind of hopeful history recently by Raja Bragman was a good book for me, at
[Guest]: least challenged me in a lot of ways that I think so.
[Guest]: Have you read it?
[Amit Varma]: No, I haven't.
[Amit Varma]: Now that you mentioned it, I have one more book to read as such a backlog, but I will
[Amit Varma]: read it.
[Guest]: Yeah, thanks for that.
[Guest]: Yeah, that one.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And in terms of public policy, in service of the republic from an Indian context, I
[Guest]: would recommend and Eugene Bardach has a very good book called a practical guide for policy
[Guest]: analysis.
[Guest]: We often use that in a course, I'd recommend that.
[Guest]: And finally, essence of decision, it will tell you how decision making inside governments
[Guest]: work.
[Guest]: That is one book.
[Guest]: For a last one, I'll cheat and add a last one.
[Guest]: It's called banishing bureaucracy, it will tell you how to reform the government within
[Guest]: itself.
[Guest]: You know, just this fundamental insight that the solution to everything is not is not necessarily
[Guest]: privatization or nationalization, or decentralization, there are ways to reform government from within
[Guest]: itself, or government organizations.
[Guest]: And I thought that was a really nice insight.
[Amit Varma]: I like the fact that it alliterates so banishing bureaucracy, murdering mandarins, bludgeoning
[Amit Varma]: babus, you know, we can we can do a lot with this alliteration praying to policy wonks.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so, Trane, thank you so much for your time and insights.
[Amit Varma]: This was just such a fantastic conversation, and I hope soon we can, you know, meet physically
[Amit Varma]: and perhaps record again at the Takshashila office, which, you know, is such a wonderful
[Amit Varma]: place with wonderful people.
[Amit Varma]: So listeners do sign up for the course.
[Amit Varma]: What are you doing?
[Amit Varma]: It's only 12 weeks, 8 to 10 hours a week, change your life now, please.
[Amit Varma]: So thanks, Trane.
[Guest]: Thanks so much, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out the show notes which are filled
[Amit Varma]: with rabbit holes for you to enter.
[Amit Varma]: If you're interested in finding out more about Takshashila's course on public policy, head
[Amit Varma]: on over to takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Prane Kottasane on Twitter at Prane Kottas, one word, you can follow
[Amit Varma]: me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seal and the Unseen at SeenUnseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Take good care of yourself.